brexit was a good choice for the uk.	0_1.	Brexit was a good choice for the UK.	pro	It was a good choice simply because that's what people voted for.	Leaving the EU allows the UK to see the effects of leaving.	The UK will always be seen as the country that decided to leave the party. This would impact its international image and relationships.	Brexit has inspired far-right movements in Europe.	In the long term, it will provide economic value to the UK.	The UK will have more freedom and sovereignty to make decisions that will make a difference, without vetting of the EU.	It will allow the UK to improve the NHS.	Many people did not realise the complexity of such a decision.	The UK has faced political and parliamentary divisions as a result of Brexit.
it was a good choice simply because that's what people voted for.	0_1.1.	It was a good choice simply because that's what people voted for.	pro	Those who have always been against it still believe it is a bad thing and many of those who voted for it are not going to get what they think they voted for - immigration was a huge misunderstood factor in decision making and unlikely to satisfy the masses.	A decision by majority vote does not necessarily mean it is a good decision.	The populations of Scotland and Northern Ireland voted against Brexit. EU Referendum Results - bbc.co.uk	Statistically speaking, Pro-Brexit posts are significantly more likely to contain spelling and grammatical errors; inferring a trend towards lower literacy among proponents of this perspective.	It's only what 52% of the electorate voted for, which doesn't even include under 18's.	Since the terms were not clear, it is entirely unclear what the people voted for. Hence the frustration with single market and customs union which were not on the ballot.	Some of the negative implications of Brexit are now becoming apparent.
those who have always been against it still believe it is a bad thing and many of those who voted for it are not going to get what they think they voted for - immigration was a huge misunderstood factor in decision making and unlikely to satisfy the masses.	0_1.1.1.	Those who have always been against it still believe it is a bad thing and many of those who voted for it are not going to get what they think they voted for - immigration was a huge misunderstood factor in decision making and unlikely to satisfy the masses.	con	
a decision by majority vote does not necessarily mean it is a good decision.	0_1.1.2.	A decision by majority vote does not necessarily mean it is a good decision.	con	The correlation between "what people vote for" and "good choice" is shown to be flawed in history, when evil dictators have risen to power through the popular vote.	What the people voted for isn't necessarily going to stop them from regretting leaving the EU.	If David Cameron had held a referendum "should every citizen of the UK be given a million pounds?" there would have been a large majority in favour. That doesn't mean it would have been a good idea.	The science behind voters manipulation is so well understood Technology development by companies like Aggregate IQ have been shown to be usedin the run up to the Brexit referendum	The referendum vote was not a decision.
the correlation between "what people vote for" and "good choice" is shown to be flawed in history, when evil dictators have risen to power through the popular vote.	0_1.1.2.1.	The correlation between "what people vote for" and "good choice" is shown to be flawed in history, when evil dictators have risen to power through the popular vote.	con	The people should be trusted with their own vote. Whether they are voting against whatever incumbent they don't like or for some decision they might not see every consequence of, the inviolability of a vote is paramount to our society. Nobody is going to remove this right on the basis of past mistakes.
the people should be trusted with their own vote. whether they are voting against whatever incumbent they don't like or for some decision they might not see every consequence of, the inviolability of a vote is paramount to our society. nobody is going to remove this right on the basis of past mistakes.	0_1.1.2.1.1.	The people should be trusted with their own vote. Whether they are voting against whatever incumbent they don't like or for some decision they might not see every consequence of, the inviolability of a vote is paramount to our society. Nobody is going to remove this right on the basis of past mistakes.	pro	This, however, doesn't mean that the public should be trusted with matters that fall far out of the majority's reach.	Less than half of the population are above average intelligence, so it is not smart to assume that the population will make good decisions.	If the people are to be trusted with their vote, then we must presume that they understood the principles under which they were voting and voted accordingly. In this case, that they knew that the referendum was advisory and reasonably expected parliament to do its sworn duty.
this, however, doesn't mean that the public should be trusted with matters that fall far out of the majority's reach.	0_1.1.2.1.1.1.	This, however, doesn't mean that the public should be trusted with matters that fall far out of the majority's reach.	con	
less than half of the population are above average intelligence, so it is not smart to assume that the population will make good decisions.	0_1.1.2.1.1.2.	Less than half of the population are above average intelligence, so it is not smart to assume that the population will make good decisions.	con	
if the people are to be trusted with their vote, then we must presume that they understood the principles under which they were voting and voted accordingly. in this case, that they knew that the referendum was advisory and reasonably expected parliament to do its sworn duty.	0_1.1.2.1.1.3.	If the people are to be trusted with their vote, then we must presume that they understood the principles under which they were voting and voted accordingly. In this case, that they knew that the referendum was advisory and reasonably expected parliament to do its sworn duty.	con	
what the people voted for isn't necessarily going to stop them from regretting leaving the eu.	0_1.1.2.2.	What the people voted for isn't necessarily going to stop them from regretting leaving the EU.	con	
if david cameron had held a referendum "should every citizen of the uk be given a million pounds?" there would have been a large majority in favour. that doesn't mean it would have been a good idea.	0_1.1.2.3.	If David Cameron had held a referendum "should every citizen of the UK be given a million pounds?" there would have been a large majority in favour. That doesn't mean it would have been a good idea.	con	Giving everybody a million pounds is not as daft an idea as it sounds since it would be a significant step towards reducing inequality. It would of course devalue the pound substantially, but that would only have a significant effect on those who have millions already.
giving everybody a million pounds is not as daft an idea as it sounds since it would be a significant step towards reducing inequality. it would of course devalue the pound substantially, but that would only have a significant effect on those who have millions already.	0_1.1.2.3.1.	Giving everybody a million pounds is not as daft an idea as it sounds since it would be a significant step towards reducing inequality. It would of course devalue the pound substantially, but that would only have a significant effect on those who have millions already.	pro	There are over 68m people in the UK. When you try to work out how much it would cost to give them each £1m, the calculator gives you an answer with letters in it.
there are over 68m people in the uk. when you try to work out how much it would cost to give them each £1m, the calculator gives you an answer with letters in it.	0_1.1.2.3.1.1.	There are over 68m people in the UK. When you try to work out how much it would cost to give them each £1m, the calculator gives you an answer with letters in it.	con	A million may be too much, nonetheless the principle is sound.
a million may be too much, nonetheless the principle is sound.	0_1.1.2.3.1.1.1.	A million may be too much, nonetheless the principle is sound.	pro	
the science behind voters manipulation is so well understood technology development by companies like aggregate iq have been shown to be usedin the run up to the brexit referendum	0_1.1.2.4.	The science behind voters manipulation is so well understood Technology development by companies like Aggregate IQ have been shown to be usedin the run up to the Brexit referendum	con	Well designed adverts were targetted at specific individuals selected through detailed analysis of their Facebook profiles. These were effectively hidden from the opposing campaign so they had no opportunity to refute the lies.
well designed adverts were targetted at specific individuals selected through detailed analysis of their facebook profiles. these were effectively hidden from the opposing campaign so they had no opportunity to refute the lies.	0_1.1.2.4.1.	Well designed adverts were targetted at specific individuals selected through detailed analysis of their Facebook profiles. These were effectively hidden from the opposing campaign so they had no opportunity to refute the lies.	con	
the referendum vote was not a decision.	0_1.1.2.5.	The referendum vote was not a decision.	pro	
the populations of scotland and northern ireland voted against brexit. eu referendum results - bbc.co.uk	0_1.1.3.	The populations of Scotland and Northern Ireland voted against Brexit. EU Referendum Results - bbc.co.uk	con	
statistically speaking, pro-brexit posts are significantly more likely to contain spelling and grammatical errors; inferring a trend towards lower literacy among proponents of this perspective.	0_1.1.4.	Statistically speaking, Pro-Brexit posts are significantly more likely to contain spelling and grammatical errors; inferring a trend towards lower literacy among proponents of this perspective.	con	It could be argued on this fact alone that this is a classist issue where "educated people" (mid to high class correlates with education have become detached from the needs of the less educated ones (most likely poor). EU is great for the people that can actually afford traveling frequently and don't want to think about visas and paperwork too much.	Just because someone is "educated" doesn't mean they know anything about international trading organisations or supranational governance. With this broad usage of "education" in mind, it's possible that the correlation is not caused by level of education but the demographic who tend to receive a higher standard of education, or the because of the attitude higher education inculcates.	This is an ad-hominem attack, so cannot be taken in itself as evidence for or against the pro-Brexit argument.
it could be argued on this fact alone that this is a classist issue where "educated people" (mid to high class correlates with education have become detached from the needs of the less educated ones (most likely poor). eu is great for the people that can actually afford traveling frequently and don't want to think about visas and paperwork too much.	0_1.1.4.1.	It could be argued on this fact alone that this is a classist issue where "educated people" (mid to high class correlates with education have become detached from the needs of the less educated ones (most likely poor). EU is great for the people that can actually afford traveling frequently and don't want to think about visas and paperwork too much.	pro	Britain is not a communist state: there are no grounds to drag everybody down to the level of the least capable.
britain is not a communist state: there are no grounds to drag everybody down to the level of the least capable.	0_1.1.4.1.1.	Britain is not a communist state: there are no grounds to drag everybody down to the level of the least capable.	con	
just because someone is "educated" doesn't mean they know anything about international trading organisations or supranational governance. with this broad usage of "education" in mind, it's possible that the correlation is not caused by level of education but the demographic who tend to receive a higher standard of education, or the because of the attitude higher education inculcates.	0_1.1.4.2.	Just because someone is "educated" doesn't mean they know anything about international trading organisations or supranational governance. With this broad usage of "education" in mind, it's possible that the correlation is not caused by level of education but the demographic who tend to receive a higher standard of education, or the because of the attitude higher education inculcates.	pro	
this is an ad-hominem attack, so cannot be taken in itself as evidence for or against the pro-brexit argument.	0_1.1.4.3.	This is an ad-hominem attack, so cannot be taken in itself as evidence for or against the pro-Brexit argument.	pro	It is not an attack on the voters who supported Leave to point out that they are less well educated than those who voted Remain. It is simply fact. Studies have shown that University graduates are more likely to have voted Remain. This suggests that better education may have given us a different result. The obvious misinformation that was disseminated to win the Leave argument backs this narrative, as educated (i.e. informed) voters would have voted differently.
it is not an attack on the voters who supported leave to point out that they are less well educated than those who voted remain. it is simply fact. studies have shown that university graduates are more likely to have voted remain. this suggests that better education may have given us a different result. the obvious misinformation that was disseminated to win the leave argument backs this narrative, as educated (i.e. informed) voters would have voted differently.	0_1.1.4.3.1.	It is not an attack on the voters who supported Leave to point out that they are less well educated than those who voted Remain. It is simply fact. Studies have shown that University graduates are more likely to have voted Remain. This suggests that better education may have given us a different result. The obvious misinformation that was disseminated to win the Leave argument backs this narrative, as educated (i.e. informed) voters would have voted differently.	con	
it's only what 52% of the electorate voted for, which doesn't even include under 18's.	0_1.1.5.	It's only what 52% of the electorate voted for, which doesn't even include under 18's.	con	Under 18s are going to be the ones more affected; they deserved more of a voice.
under 18s are going to be the ones more affected; they deserved more of a voice.	0_1.1.5.1.	Under 18s are going to be the ones more affected; they deserved more of a voice.	con	
since the terms were not clear, it is entirely unclear what the people voted for. hence the frustration with single market and customs union which were not on the ballot.	0_1.1.6.	Since the terms were not clear, it is entirely unclear what the people voted for. Hence the frustration with single market and customs union which were not on the ballot.	con	The slim 'majority' has now divided the country and left nearly half the voters with the impression that their opinion is being ignored, as hard-line Brexiters rush and push to a 'Hard Brexit' that even few 'Leavers' understood the consequences of when they put their cross in the box to leave.	The Leave vote was driven by emotional arguments about regaining sovereignty. Very few who voted to leave understood the complexities arising from this decision, e.g. how to preserve Good Friday Agreement.
the slim 'majority' has now divided the country and left nearly half the voters with the impression that their opinion is being ignored, as hard-line brexiters rush and push to a 'hard brexit' that even few 'leavers' understood the consequences of when they put their cross in the box to leave.	0_1.1.6.1.	The slim 'majority' has now divided the country and left nearly half the voters with the impression that their opinion is being ignored, as hard-line Brexiters rush and push to a 'Hard Brexit' that even few 'Leavers' understood the consequences of when they put their cross in the box to leave.	con	Many people did not realise the complexity of such a decision.
many people did not realise the complexity of such a decision.	0_1.1.6.1.1.	Many people did not realise the complexity of such a decision.	con	Those commanding the 'Leave' campaign seem to regret it.	The Brexit debate was highjacked by populists, who used emotional non-factual arguments regarding immigration, the NHS and sovereignty to mobilise support in large sections of the population, who are typically disengaged. Without this wilful misleading, the remain vote would have prevailed. Wide participation in politics is vital for democracy, however this needs to be supported by education in critical thinking and unbiased data & media, to enable people to make reasoned choices.	The complexity of the decision has no bearing on whether it was a good choice.	It is up to the individual to ensure that they are well informed, educated and capable of making such a decision. Sufficient time was made for debate, research and questions to be asked. A reasonably capable person would not trust propaganda nor hearsay. Ultimately, if on decision day each individual did not feel equipped to make the choice, then they could abstain from voting, if required, rather than voting at random or using instinct for such an important event.	There is no single interpretation of the "Leave" vote which truly represents the tiny majority that voted "Leave". Therefore, any particular Brexit strategy is likely to fragment the "Leave" voters into minorities.	The people did not make a decision: they expressed an opinion and parliament deferred the decision to the Prime Minister.	There are more than 40 years of legislation and institutions to undo or rebuild. It just can't be done in two years, and all that time spent. Simply converting all EU laws to UK laws goes against the very reason to leave.	We elect representatives to do the right thing for the country as a whole and with a long term perspective, not the most popular thing. They should not have outsourced this complex decision to the the general public who were always more likely to vote in an emotional and short term way.	With the benefit of hindsight, it would have been better if the referendum had been the final seal of approval after all of the complicated negotiations. Then we'd have known what we were voting for or against. As things stand, the majority of leave voters will be disappointed when their particular vision of Brexit does not come to pass. There will be widespread discontent among remainers and leavers alike. No one wins.	Brexit will cost a lot of money to the UK. This will have a trickle down effect on the citizens of the UK.
those commanding the 'leave' campaign seem to regret it.	0_1.1.6.1.1.1.	Those commanding the 'Leave' campaign seem to regret it.	con	All of the main players in the campaign to leave deserted the ship on hearing the result but continue to snipe from the sidelines without taking responsibility for their actions. There should be a final vote put to the people on any deal reached, because the people that fought for Brexit are no longer in a position to dictate terms for the exit deal.
all of the main players in the campaign to leave deserted the ship on hearing the result but continue to snipe from the sidelines without taking responsibility for their actions. there should be a final vote put to the people on any deal reached, because the people that fought for brexit are no longer in a position to dictate terms for the exit deal.	0_1.1.6.1.1.1.1.	All of the main players in the campaign to leave deserted the ship on hearing the result but continue to snipe from the sidelines without taking responsibility for their actions. There should be a final vote put to the people on any deal reached, because the people that fought for Brexit are no longer in a position to dictate terms for the exit deal.	con	
the brexit debate was highjacked by populists, who used emotional non-factual arguments regarding immigration, the nhs and sovereignty to mobilise support in large sections of the population, who are typically disengaged. without this wilful misleading, the remain vote would have prevailed. wide participation in politics is vital for democracy, however this needs to be supported by education in critical thinking and unbiased data & media, to enable people to make reasoned choices.	0_1.1.6.1.1.2.	The Brexit debate was highjacked by populists, who used emotional non-factual arguments regarding immigration, the NHS and sovereignty to mobilise support in large sections of the population, who are typically disengaged. Without this wilful misleading, the remain vote would have prevailed. Wide participation in politics is vital for democracy, however this needs to be supported by education in critical thinking and unbiased data & media, to enable people to make reasoned choices.	con	Emotional, non-factual arguments were widely used on both sides of the debate - not just the Leave side. It is not reasonable to assume that one side was influenced by this "wilful misleading" more than the other.
emotional, non-factual arguments were widely used on both sides of the debate - not just the leave side. it is not reasonable to assume that one side was influenced by this "wilful misleading" more than the other.	0_1.1.6.1.1.2.1.	Emotional, non-factual arguments were widely used on both sides of the debate - not just the Leave side. It is not reasonable to assume that one side was influenced by this "wilful misleading" more than the other.	pro	
the complexity of the decision has no bearing on whether it was a good choice.	0_1.1.6.1.1.3.	The complexity of the decision has no bearing on whether it was a good choice.	pro	It had a bearing on whether the choice was made with enough clarity for that choice to be rational.	It is better to toss a coin than to have complex decisions made by people who do not begin to grasp the relevant implications.
it had a bearing on whether the choice was made with enough clarity for that choice to be rational.	0_1.1.6.1.1.3.1.	It had a bearing on whether the choice was made with enough clarity for that choice to be rational.	con	
it is better to toss a coin than to have complex decisions made by people who do not begin to grasp the relevant implications.	0_1.1.6.1.1.3.2.	It is better to toss a coin than to have complex decisions made by people who do not begin to grasp the relevant implications.	con	
it is up to the individual to ensure that they are well informed, educated and capable of making such a decision. sufficient time was made for debate, research and questions to be asked. a reasonably capable person would not trust propaganda nor hearsay. ultimately, if on decision day each individual did not feel equipped to make the choice, then they could abstain from voting, if required, rather than voting at random or using instinct for such an important event.	0_1.1.6.1.1.4.	It is up to the individual to ensure that they are well informed, educated and capable of making such a decision. Sufficient time was made for debate, research and questions to be asked. A reasonably capable person would not trust propaganda nor hearsay. Ultimately, if on decision day each individual did not feel equipped to make the choice, then they could abstain from voting, if required, rather than voting at random or using instinct for such an important event.	pro	The reality of Brexit was unknowable given its dependency on the unfolding of complex negotiations both within the UK and between the UK and the EU. As these have developed a clearer sense of the form and implications of Brexit is emerging and people should have the chance to base their choice for the UK’s future on this information that did not exist at the time of the 2016 referendum.	It is the job of parliament to be well informed and make decisions. All that the electorate needed to do was to express an opinion. To abrogate such an important decision to the electorate would be a gross dereliction of duty.
the reality of brexit was unknowable given its dependency on the unfolding of complex negotiations both within the uk and between the uk and the eu. as these have developed a clearer sense of the form and implications of brexit is emerging and people should have the chance to base their choice for the uk’s future on this information that did not exist at the time of the 2016 referendum.	0_1.1.6.1.1.4.1.	The reality of Brexit was unknowable given its dependency on the unfolding of complex negotiations both within the UK and between the UK and the EU. As these have developed a clearer sense of the form and implications of Brexit is emerging and people should have the chance to base their choice for the UK’s future on this information that did not exist at the time of the 2016 referendum.	con	
it is the job of parliament to be well informed and make decisions. all that the electorate needed to do was to express an opinion. to abrogate such an important decision to the electorate would be a gross dereliction of duty.	0_1.1.6.1.1.4.2.	It is the job of parliament to be well informed and make decisions. All that the electorate needed to do was to express an opinion. To abrogate such an important decision to the electorate would be a gross dereliction of duty.	con	
there is no single interpretation of the "leave" vote which truly represents the tiny majority that voted "leave". therefore, any particular brexit strategy is likely to fragment the "leave" voters into minorities.	0_1.1.6.1.1.5.	There is no single interpretation of the "Leave" vote which truly represents the tiny majority that voted "Leave". Therefore, any particular Brexit strategy is likely to fragment the "Leave" voters into minorities.	con	Equally, there are a range of views on the future of the EU on the Leave side, from committed federalists, to natural eurosceptics who voted out of fear of the unknown. The referendum campaign presented many different views on the future. People weighed these up to the best of their ability and the majority settled on Leave.	In spite of many claims today that "Brexit means Brexit" and "Of course Leave means leaving the Customs Union and Single Market". There was a lot of talk from prominent Leave campaigners at the time of the referendum about the Norway Model and about remaining in the single market.
equally, there are a range of views on the future of the eu on the leave side, from committed federalists, to natural eurosceptics who voted out of fear of the unknown. the referendum campaign presented many different views on the future. people weighed these up to the best of their ability and the majority settled on leave.	0_1.1.6.1.1.5.1.	Equally, there are a range of views on the future of the EU on the Leave side, from committed federalists, to natural eurosceptics who voted out of fear of the unknown. The referendum campaign presented many different views on the future. People weighed these up to the best of their ability and the majority settled on Leave.	pro	
in spite of many claims today that "brexit means brexit" and "of course leave means leaving the customs union and single market". there was a lot of talk from prominent leave campaigners at the time of the referendum about the norway model and about remaining in the single market.	0_1.1.6.1.1.5.2.	In spite of many claims today that "Brexit means Brexit" and "Of course Leave means leaving the Customs Union and Single Market". There was a lot of talk from prominent Leave campaigners at the time of the referendum about the Norway Model and about remaining in the single market.	con	
the people did not make a decision: they expressed an opinion and parliament deferred the decision to the prime minister.	0_1.1.6.1.1.6.	The people did not make a decision: they expressed an opinion and parliament deferred the decision to the Prime Minister.	pro	Theresa May did not realise the complexity of the decision.
theresa may did not realise the complexity of the decision.	0_1.1.6.1.1.6.1.	Theresa May did not realise the complexity of the decision.	con	It is unrealistic to suppose that the Prime Minister of the nation, with the benefit of all her advisors and staff, did not realise the complexity of the decision: May knew it full well, but made her decision in simple terms of what her party wanted of her.
it is unrealistic to suppose that the prime minister of the nation, with the benefit of all her advisors and staff, did not realise the complexity of the decision: may knew it full well, but made her decision in simple terms of what her party wanted of her.	0_1.1.6.1.1.6.1.1.	It is unrealistic to suppose that the Prime Minister of the nation, with the benefit of all her advisors and staff, did not realise the complexity of the decision: May knew it full well, but made her decision in simple terms of what her party wanted of her.	pro	
there are more than 40 years of legislation and institutions to undo or rebuild. it just can't be done in two years, and all that time spent. simply converting all eu laws to uk laws goes against the very reason to leave.	0_1.1.6.1.1.7.	There are more than 40 years of legislation and institutions to undo or rebuild. It just can't be done in two years, and all that time spent. Simply converting all EU laws to UK laws goes against the very reason to leave.	con	There are over three million Europeans in UK, and over one million UK citizens in the EU left with little guarantees at this point. All discussions on this topic are still at embryonic stage and create uncertainty.	Transferring the legislation into UK law is a pragmatic, transitional measure to ensure continuity. Once the UK has left the EU, each law can be scrutinised by the UK parliament and modified, left untouched or repealed as we see fit and in our own time. This is the very essence of "taking back control".
there are over three million europeans in uk, and over one million uk citizens in the eu left with little guarantees at this point. all discussions on this topic are still at embryonic stage and create uncertainty.	0_1.1.6.1.1.7.1.	There are over three million Europeans in UK, and over one million UK citizens in the EU left with little guarantees at this point. All discussions on this topic are still at embryonic stage and create uncertainty.	con	Both Brits on the mainland and EU citizens in Britain will be able to remain where they are. No government has the time or resources to deal with legal action against them by hundreds of thousands of individuals who would lose out financially and socially were they to have to leave. This issue will be settled with a form and a government stamp.	The EU-UK joint statement of 8th December clarifies in detail how the rights of EU citizens in the UK and UK citizens in the EU will be protected.
both brits on the mainland and eu citizens in britain will be able to remain where they are. no government has the time or resources to deal with legal action against them by hundreds of thousands of individuals who would lose out financially and socially were they to have to leave. this issue will be settled with a form and a government stamp.	0_1.1.6.1.1.7.1.1.	Both Brits on the mainland and EU citizens in Britain will be able to remain where they are. No government has the time or resources to deal with legal action against them by hundreds of thousands of individuals who would lose out financially and socially were they to have to leave. This issue will be settled with a form and a government stamp.	pro	People may well be the victim of government neglect. The legal challenges may materialize only if the governments (on both sides) allow them through legislation. Other than that once the UK withdraws, in absence of other legally binding agreement, the rights of EU/UK citizens are automatically withdrawn as well.
people may well be the victim of government neglect. the legal challenges may materialize only if the governments (on both sides) allow them through legislation. other than that once the uk withdraws, in absence of other legally binding agreement, the rights of eu/uk citizens are automatically withdrawn as well.	0_1.1.6.1.1.7.1.1.1.	People may well be the victim of government neglect. The legal challenges may materialize only if the governments (on both sides) allow them through legislation. Other than that once the UK withdraws, in absence of other legally binding agreement, the rights of EU/UK citizens are automatically withdrawn as well.	con	
the eu-uk joint statement of 8th december clarifies in detail how the rights of eu citizens in the uk and uk citizens in the eu will be protected.	0_1.1.6.1.1.7.1.2.	The EU-UK joint statement of 8th December clarifies in detail how the rights of EU citizens in the UK and UK citizens in the EU will be protected.	pro	
transferring the legislation into uk law is a pragmatic, transitional measure to ensure continuity. once the uk has left the eu, each law can be scrutinised by the uk parliament and modified, left untouched or repealed as we see fit and in our own time. this is the very essence of "taking back control".	0_1.1.6.1.1.7.2.	Transferring the legislation into UK law is a pragmatic, transitional measure to ensure continuity. Once the UK has left the EU, each law can be scrutinised by the UK parliament and modified, left untouched or repealed as we see fit and in our own time. This is the very essence of "taking back control".	pro	
we elect representatives to do the right thing for the country as a whole and with a long term perspective, not the most popular thing. they should not have outsourced this complex decision to the the general public who were always more likely to vote in an emotional and short term way.	0_1.1.6.1.1.8.	We elect representatives to do the right thing for the country as a whole and with a long term perspective, not the most popular thing. They should not have outsourced this complex decision to the the general public who were always more likely to vote in an emotional and short term way.	con	This is why we have a representative democracy in which referendums such as this one can only ever be advisory.	We don't choose representatives based upon their intellect or morals or integrity, but rather their political allegiance. This does not confer a greater ability to make decisions.	Parliament did not outsource this decision: the referendum was not binding. The Prime Minister of the day overstepped his authority in his promise to be bound by it.
this is why we have a representative democracy in which referendums such as this one can only ever be advisory.	0_1.1.6.1.1.8.1.	This is why we have a representative democracy in which referendums such as this one can only ever be advisory.	con	
we don't choose representatives based upon their intellect or morals or integrity, but rather their political allegiance. this does not confer a greater ability to make decisions.	0_1.1.6.1.1.8.2.	We don't choose representatives based upon their intellect or morals or integrity, but rather their political allegiance. This does not confer a greater ability to make decisions.	pro	
parliament did not outsource this decision: the referendum was not binding. the prime minister of the day overstepped his authority in his promise to be bound by it.	0_1.1.6.1.1.8.3.	Parliament did not outsource this decision: the referendum was not binding. The Prime Minister of the day overstepped his authority in his promise to be bound by it.	pro	The High Court confirmed that the result of the referendum was not legally binding, owing to the constitutional principles of parliamentary sovereignty and representative democracy. This was also confirmed by the UK Supreme Court.
the high court confirmed that the result of the referendum was not legally binding, owing to the constitutional principles of parliamentary sovereignty and representative democracy. this was also confirmed by the uk supreme court.	0_1.1.6.1.1.8.3.1.	The High Court confirmed that the result of the referendum was not legally binding, owing to the constitutional principles of parliamentary sovereignty and representative democracy. This was also confirmed by the UK Supreme Court.	pro	The popular press labelled the High Court judges as traitors: in a mediacracy their opinion hold more weight than the courts.
the popular press labelled the high court judges as traitors: in a mediacracy their opinion hold more weight than the courts.	0_1.1.6.1.1.8.3.1.1.	The popular press labelled the High Court judges as traitors: in a mediacracy their opinion hold more weight than the courts.	con	
with the benefit of hindsight, it would have been better if the referendum had been the final seal of approval after all of the complicated negotiations. then we'd have known what we were voting for or against. as things stand, the majority of leave voters will be disappointed when their particular vision of brexit does not come to pass. there will be widespread discontent among remainers and leavers alike. no one wins.	0_1.1.6.1.1.9.	With the benefit of hindsight, it would have been better if the referendum had been the final seal of approval after all of the complicated negotiations. Then we'd have known what we were voting for or against. As things stand, the majority of leave voters will be disappointed when their particular vision of Brexit does not come to pass. There will be widespread discontent among remainers and leavers alike. No one wins.	con	It was. The EU refused any further negotiation until article 50 was triggered.	With the benefit of hindsight, all manner of different things could have happened. Not the least of which, the duration between announcing the referendum and holding it would have enabled adequate time for the country to reflect on the decision it was going to make. Also with the benefit of hindsight, the question could have been clearer, a threshold could have been set, an independent body could have fact-checked both sides of the argument. Either way, hindsight in this argument is irrelevant.	There is increased clarity now on what Brexit would actually mean; the complexity and difficulty and problems are honestly laid out for anyone to see. As far as public opinion is concerned, that is a new political context; a context in which the initial vote didn't happen. Given the new clarity of the situation, a lot of minds may have been changed. Even in general terms (let alone any specific practicalities) Brexit may now represent a minority.
it was. the eu refused any further negotiation until article 50 was triggered.	0_1.1.6.1.1.9.1.	It was. The EU refused any further negotiation until article 50 was triggered.	pro	
with the benefit of hindsight, all manner of different things could have happened. not the least of which, the duration between announcing the referendum and holding it would have enabled adequate time for the country to reflect on the decision it was going to make. also with the benefit of hindsight, the question could have been clearer, a threshold could have been set, an independent body could have fact-checked both sides of the argument. either way, hindsight in this argument is irrelevant.	0_1.1.6.1.1.9.2.	With the benefit of hindsight, all manner of different things could have happened. Not the least of which, the duration between announcing the referendum and holding it would have enabled adequate time for the country to reflect on the decision it was going to make. Also with the benefit of hindsight, the question could have been clearer, a threshold could have been set, an independent body could have fact-checked both sides of the argument. Either way, hindsight in this argument is irrelevant.	pro	
there is increased clarity now on what brexit would actually mean; the complexity and difficulty and problems are honestly laid out for anyone to see. as far as public opinion is concerned, that is a new political context; a context in which the initial vote didn't happen. given the new clarity of the situation, a lot of minds may have been changed. even in general terms (let alone any specific practicalities) brexit may now represent a minority.	0_1.1.6.1.1.9.3.	There is increased clarity now on what Brexit would actually mean; the complexity and difficulty and problems are honestly laid out for anyone to see. As far as public opinion is concerned, that is a new political context; a context in which the initial vote didn't happen. Given the new clarity of the situation, a lot of minds may have been changed. Even in general terms (let alone any specific practicalities) Brexit may now represent a minority.	con	It may now represent a minority. It may be unchanged. It may now represent an increased majority. This is pure speculation and does not support the argument one way or the other.
it may now represent a minority. it may be unchanged. it may now represent an increased majority. this is pure speculation and does not support the argument one way or the other.	0_1.1.6.1.1.9.3.1.	It may now represent a minority. It may be unchanged. It may now represent an increased majority. This is pure speculation and does not support the argument one way or the other.	pro	
brexit will cost a lot of money to the uk. this will have a trickle down effect on the citizens of the uk.	0_1.1.6.1.1.10.	Brexit will cost a lot of money to the UK. This will have a trickle down effect on the citizens of the UK.	con	Based on direct costs such as job losses from the finance sector, as well as inflation eroding incomes and savings, Brexit will cost Britain £300 million a week over eight years. This means that less money will available for social security and unemployment benefits.
based on direct costs such as job losses from the finance sector, as well as inflation eroding incomes and savings, brexit will cost britain £300 million a week over eight years. this means that less money will available for social security and unemployment benefits.	0_1.1.6.1.1.10.1.	Based on direct costs such as job losses from the finance sector, as well as inflation eroding incomes and savings, Brexit will cost Britain £300 million a week over eight years. This means that less money will available for social security and unemployment benefits.	con	
the leave vote was driven by emotional arguments about regaining sovereignty. very few who voted to leave understood the complexities arising from this decision, e.g. how to preserve good friday agreement.	0_1.1.6.2.	The Leave vote was driven by emotional arguments about regaining sovereignty. Very few who voted to leave understood the complexities arising from this decision, e.g. how to preserve Good Friday Agreement.	con	
some of the negative implications of brexit are now becoming apparent.	0_1.1.7.	Some of the negative implications of Brexit are now becoming apparent.	con	Inward investment in the UK has slowed dramatically as potential manufacturing concerns are beginning to recognize the political and geographical disadvantages of locating, and indeed remaining in a post-Brexit UK.
inward investment in the uk has slowed dramatically as potential manufacturing concerns are beginning to recognize the political and geographical disadvantages of locating, and indeed remaining in a post-brexit uk.	0_1.1.7.1.	Inward investment in the UK has slowed dramatically as potential manufacturing concerns are beginning to recognize the political and geographical disadvantages of locating, and indeed remaining in a post-Brexit UK.	con	
leaving the eu allows the uk to see the effects of leaving.	0_1.2.	Leaving the EU allows the UK to see the effects of leaving.	pro	If the UK had not left, there would remain unanswerable questions about "what could have been", in perpetuity. Leaving will provide this answer, be it good or bad or mixed.	Research and discussion should be the method for seeing if it's worth leaving the EU, not actually leaving the EU, and then seeing what happens. Only when the calculated risk of leaving is low enough should leaving be an option, not before. This is the premise of any decision that involves risk.
if the uk had not left, there would remain unanswerable questions about "what could have been", in perpetuity. leaving will provide this answer, be it good or bad or mixed.	0_1.2.1.	If the UK had not left, there would remain unanswerable questions about "what could have been", in perpetuity. Leaving will provide this answer, be it good or bad or mixed.	pro	
research and discussion should be the method for seeing if it's worth leaving the eu, not actually leaving the eu, and then seeing what happens. only when the calculated risk of leaving is low enough should leaving be an option, not before. this is the premise of any decision that involves risk.	0_1.2.2.	Research and discussion should be the method for seeing if it's worth leaving the EU, not actually leaving the EU, and then seeing what happens. Only when the calculated risk of leaving is low enough should leaving be an option, not before. This is the premise of any decision that involves risk.	con	
the uk will always be seen as the country that decided to leave the party. this would impact its international image and relationships.	0_1.3.	The UK will always be seen as the country that decided to leave the party. This would impact its international image and relationships.	con	Being in the EU helps the UK negotiate on the world stage with the weight of 512M people and the cost of negotiation spread across 27 countries. Unilateral negotiation of deals alone represents only 60M people and the deal was renegotiated 27 times.	There is strength in numbers. This is particularly important when traditional alliances are fraying. Instead of dumping the EU the UK should have been more actively working to fix its faults.	The UK left the party legally, cordially, and with fair warning, thus Brexit is unlikely to tarnish the UK's international standing and relationships.	Brexit causes frictions with Scotland and Northern Ireland.	The UK has always had a privileged position within the EU, with special rules that do not apply to other member states. Leaving a strong economic block will weaken the negotiation position of the country and will leave it more vulnerable to unfair conditions from other giants such as the USA and China.	This is correct. In a sense it is unfortunate, but the media contributed to disinformation, be it by 40 years of lies in the tabloids and by the BBC's biased coverage in the run up to the referendum. This made the British public make an ill-informed decision, the consequences of which are yet to be seen and which will need to be put up with.	The United Kingdom needs alliances in order to realize its advantages (financial center, research & technological know-how); the natural partners are its historical colonies - the Commonwealth & the US. Stability with the “Continent,” however, which would leverage the UK’s advantages, was easier within the EU than outside it, in the medium to long term.	There are 28 countries "at the party" and 167 who have never been invited. Many countries outside the EU see it as protectionist. Leaving will help us build closer relationships with these countries.	The decision to leave the party will be insignificant in comparison to the conduct of the nation's representatives throughout the withdrawal negotiations.
being in the eu helps the uk negotiate on the world stage with the weight of 512m people and the cost of negotiation spread across 27 countries. unilateral negotiation of deals alone represents only 60m people and the deal was renegotiated 27 times.	0_1.3.1.	Being in the EU helps the UK negotiate on the world stage with the weight of 512M people and the cost of negotiation spread across 27 countries. Unilateral negotiation of deals alone represents only 60M people and the deal was renegotiated 27 times.	con	
there is strength in numbers. this is particularly important when traditional alliances are fraying. instead of dumping the eu the uk should have been more actively working to fix its faults.	0_1.3.2.	There is strength in numbers. This is particularly important when traditional alliances are fraying. Instead of dumping the EU the UK should have been more actively working to fix its faults.	con	
the uk left the party legally, cordially, and with fair warning, thus brexit is unlikely to tarnish the uk's international standing and relationships.	0_1.3.3.	The UK left the party legally, cordially, and with fair warning, thus Brexit is unlikely to tarnish the UK's international standing and relationships.	pro	Given the number of items in the withdrawal agreement that the UK government has welshed on, not to mention all the lies that they tell to their own citizens, the UK will almost certainly be seen as duplicitous.	The United Kingdom exercised a legal right through Article 50 to leave the European Union. It didn't walk away without warning or mechanism.	The decision to leave was well telegraphed with David Cameron going to the EU prior to calling the referendum seeking renegotiations.
given the number of items in the withdrawal agreement that the uk government has welshed on, not to mention all the lies that they tell to their own citizens, the uk will almost certainly be seen as duplicitous.	0_1.3.3.1.	Given the number of items in the withdrawal agreement that the UK government has welshed on, not to mention all the lies that they tell to their own citizens, the UK will almost certainly be seen as duplicitous.	con	
the united kingdom exercised a legal right through article 50 to leave the european union. it didn't walk away without warning or mechanism.	0_1.3.3.2.	The United Kingdom exercised a legal right through Article 50 to leave the European Union. It didn't walk away without warning or mechanism.	pro	
the decision to leave was well telegraphed with david cameron going to the eu prior to calling the referendum seeking renegotiations.	0_1.3.3.3.	The decision to leave was well telegraphed with David Cameron going to the EU prior to calling the referendum seeking renegotiations.	pro	
brexit causes frictions with scotland and northern ireland.	0_1.3.4.	Brexit causes frictions with Scotland and Northern Ireland.	con	Continued membership of the EU was a significant factor in the Scottish independence referendum.	Scotland is overwhelmingly pro-EU and has questioned its ties with London and Britain over this decision. An unfavourable Brexit may also trigger further possibilities of an independent Scotland who wishes to remain in the EU.	Brexit makes no sense for Northern Ireland whose border with the Republic of Ireland is over 300 miles long and has 275 crossing points. Furthermore, ignoring farms that cross the border would make a hard land border unenforceable (p. 7.	Britain requires food exports from the Republic of Ireland which is in the EU and can't produce enough food for its population on its own.	Scotland reduced it's support of the separatist SNP, considerably, in the Scottish elections following Brexit. The first minister admitted that her call for a second referendum immediately after Brexit was a key factor in the Scottish National party’s loss of 21 of 56 Westminster seats.	Some people voted Brexit to end freedom of movement between the UK and the EU, which means ending freedom of movement between Ireland and NI. If freedom of movement doesn't end, people will not get the restrictions they hoped for. If they did, it would be a problem for those in NI and Ireland.
continued membership of the eu was a significant factor in the scottish independence referendum.	0_1.3.4.1.	Continued membership of the EU was a significant factor in the Scottish independence referendum.	con	
scotland is overwhelmingly pro-eu and has questioned its ties with london and britain over this decision. an unfavourable brexit may also trigger further possibilities of an independent scotland who wishes to remain in the eu.	0_1.3.4.2.	Scotland is overwhelmingly pro-EU and has questioned its ties with London and Britain over this decision. An unfavourable Brexit may also trigger further possibilities of an independent Scotland who wishes to remain in the EU.	con	
brexit makes no sense for northern ireland whose border with the republic of ireland is over 300 miles long and has 275 crossing points. furthermore, ignoring farms that cross the border would make a hard land border unenforceable (p. 7.	0_1.3.4.3.	Brexit makes no sense for Northern Ireland whose border with the Republic of Ireland is over 300 miles long and has 275 crossing points. Furthermore, ignoring farms that cross the border would make a hard land border unenforceable (p. 7.	con	Brexit will very likely lead to the reunification of Ireland.
brexit will very likely lead to the reunification of ireland.	0_1.3.4.3.1.	Brexit will very likely lead to the reunification of Ireland.	pro	The reunification of Ireland could take a long time.	After Northern Ireland voted Remain with a 55.8% majority, there were immediate calls for a border poll to vote through referendum to unify.	The reunification of Ireland is also supported by some Northern Ireland politicians.
the reunification of ireland could take a long time.	0_1.3.4.3.1.1.	The reunification of Ireland could take a long time.	con	Ireland was partitioned a century ago. A few more years will make little difference.
ireland was partitioned a century ago. a few more years will make little difference.	0_1.3.4.3.1.1.1.	Ireland was partitioned a century ago. A few more years will make little difference.	pro	
after northern ireland voted remain with a 55.8% majority, there were immediate calls for a border poll to vote through referendum to unify.	0_1.3.4.3.1.2.	After Northern Ireland voted Remain with a 55.8% majority, there were immediate calls for a border poll to vote through referendum to unify.	pro	
the reunification of ireland is also supported by some northern ireland politicians.	0_1.3.4.3.1.3.	The reunification of Ireland is also supported by some Northern Ireland politicians.	pro	Northern Ireland's deputy leader Martin McGuinness remarked that “there is a democratic imperative for a ‘border poll.’”
northern ireland's deputy leader martin mcguinness remarked that “there is a democratic imperative for a ‘border poll.’”	0_1.3.4.3.1.3.1.	Northern Ireland's deputy leader Martin McGuinness remarked that “there is a democratic imperative for a ‘border poll.’”	pro	
britain requires food exports from the republic of ireland which is in the eu and can't produce enough food for its population on its own.	0_1.3.4.4.	Britain requires food exports from the Republic of Ireland which is in the EU and can't produce enough food for its population on its own.	con	Just because Britain cannot produce enough food for its own population, it doesn't necessarily mean it must import from Ireland specifically.
just because britain cannot produce enough food for its own population, it doesn't necessarily mean it must import from ireland specifically.	0_1.3.4.4.1.	Just because Britain cannot produce enough food for its own population, it doesn't necessarily mean it must import from Ireland specifically.	pro	
scotland reduced it's support of the separatist snp, considerably, in the scottish elections following brexit. the first minister admitted that her call for a second referendum immediately after brexit was a key factor in the scottish national party’s loss of 21 of 56 westminster seats.	0_1.3.4.5.	Scotland reduced it's support of the separatist SNP, considerably, in the Scottish elections following Brexit. The first minister admitted that her call for a second referendum immediately after Brexit was a key factor in the Scottish National party’s loss of 21 of 56 Westminster seats.	pro	The general election was strongly presented as "Support Theresa May" or "Remove Theresa May". In a First Past The Post system such polarisation makes voting for anyone but the two main parties a greater risk of the "wrong" party winning the seat. People who wanted to prevent Theresa May gaining greater majority tactically voted in the election.
the general election was strongly presented as "support theresa may" or "remove theresa may". in a first past the post system such polarisation makes voting for anyone but the two main parties a greater risk of the "wrong" party winning the seat. people who wanted to prevent theresa may gaining greater majority tactically voted in the election.	0_1.3.4.5.1.	The general election was strongly presented as "Support Theresa May" or "Remove Theresa May". In a First Past The Post system such polarisation makes voting for anyone but the two main parties a greater risk of the "wrong" party winning the seat. People who wanted to prevent Theresa May gaining greater majority tactically voted in the election.	con	
some people voted brexit to end freedom of movement between the uk and the eu, which means ending freedom of movement between ireland and ni. if freedom of movement doesn't end, people will not get the restrictions they hoped for. if they did, it would be a problem for those in ni and ireland.	0_1.3.4.6.	Some people voted Brexit to end freedom of movement between the UK and the EU, which means ending freedom of movement between Ireland and NI. If freedom of movement doesn't end, people will not get the restrictions they hoped for. If they did, it would be a problem for those in NI and Ireland.	con	
the uk has always had a privileged position within the eu, with special rules that do not apply to other member states. leaving a strong economic block will weaken the negotiation position of the country and will leave it more vulnerable to unfair conditions from other giants such as the usa and china.	0_1.3.5.	The UK has always had a privileged position within the EU, with special rules that do not apply to other member states. Leaving a strong economic block will weaken the negotiation position of the country and will leave it more vulnerable to unfair conditions from other giants such as the USA and China.	con	Brexit was definitely not a good choice for the UK, as can be seen with the current media speculation on the potential consequences. However, the British public have spoken, and thus, Brexit will, in all likelihood, go ahead. This will probably benefit the other 27 countries, who can carry on their cooperation without constantly having to worry about the one country which tries to veto everything or get special treatment.
brexit was definitely not a good choice for the uk, as can be seen with the current media speculation on the potential consequences. however, the british public have spoken, and thus, brexit will, in all likelihood, go ahead. this will probably benefit the other 27 countries, who can carry on their cooperation without constantly having to worry about the one country which tries to veto everything or get special treatment.	0_1.3.5.1.	Brexit was definitely not a good choice for the UK, as can be seen with the current media speculation on the potential consequences. However, the British public have spoken, and thus, Brexit will, in all likelihood, go ahead. This will probably benefit the other 27 countries, who can carry on their cooperation without constantly having to worry about the one country which tries to veto everything or get special treatment.	con	
this is correct. in a sense it is unfortunate, but the media contributed to disinformation, be it by 40 years of lies in the tabloids and by the bbc's biased coverage in the run up to the referendum. this made the british public make an ill-informed decision, the consequences of which are yet to be seen and which will need to be put up with.	0_1.3.6.	This is correct. In a sense it is unfortunate, but the media contributed to disinformation, be it by 40 years of lies in the tabloids and by the BBC's biased coverage in the run up to the referendum. This made the British public make an ill-informed decision, the consequences of which are yet to be seen and which will need to be put up with.	con	
the united kingdom needs alliances in order to realize its advantages (financial center, research & technological know-how); the natural partners are its historical colonies - the commonwealth & the us. stability with the “continent,” however, which would leverage the uk’s advantages, was easier within the eu than outside it, in the medium to long term.	0_1.3.7.	The United Kingdom needs alliances in order to realize its advantages (financial center, research & technological know-how); the natural partners are its historical colonies - the Commonwealth & the US. Stability with the “Continent,” however, which would leverage the UK’s advantages, was easier within the EU than outside it, in the medium to long term.	con	
there are 28 countries "at the party" and 167 who have never been invited. many countries outside the eu see it as protectionist. leaving will help us build closer relationships with these countries.	0_1.3.8.	There are 28 countries "at the party" and 167 who have never been invited. Many countries outside the EU see it as protectionist. Leaving will help us build closer relationships with these countries.	pro	The EU is protectionist. The relevant question becomes one of whether we want that protection to protect us, or to protect them from us.	Most countries with advanced economies are in the European Union or have an established trade agreement with the EU. New negotiations would need to take place which may not be of as much benefit to the UK.	"Protectionist" is a positive if you are currently a member. Protections to safeguard jobs and workers rights against cheap imports from 3rd world nations who disregard workers rights and safety in order to gain competitive advantage.	The EU is the most open to developing countries as any other market in terms of trade.	The EU Commission is not afraid to use its regulatory powers to protect and boost its own tech sector.	The EU has a policy of agricultural protectionism under the guise of quality and safety standards, especially in relation to GMO foods.
the eu is protectionist. the relevant question becomes one of whether we want that protection to protect us, or to protect them from us.	0_1.3.8.1.	The EU is protectionist. The relevant question becomes one of whether we want that protection to protect us, or to protect them from us.	con	
most countries with advanced economies are in the european union or have an established trade agreement with the eu. new negotiations would need to take place which may not be of as much benefit to the uk.	0_1.3.8.2.	Most countries with advanced economies are in the European Union or have an established trade agreement with the EU. New negotiations would need to take place which may not be of as much benefit to the UK.	con	
"protectionist" is a positive if you are currently a member. protections to safeguard jobs and workers rights against cheap imports from 3rd world nations who disregard workers rights and safety in order to gain competitive advantage.	0_1.3.8.3.	"Protectionist" is a positive if you are currently a member. Protections to safeguard jobs and workers rights against cheap imports from 3rd world nations who disregard workers rights and safety in order to gain competitive advantage.	con	
the eu is the most open to developing countries as any other market in terms of trade.	0_1.3.8.4.	The EU is the most open to developing countries as any other market in terms of trade.	con	
the eu commission is not afraid to use its regulatory powers to protect and boost its own tech sector.	0_1.3.8.5.	The EU Commission is not afraid to use its regulatory powers to protect and boost its own tech sector.	pro	
the eu has a policy of agricultural protectionism under the guise of quality and safety standards, especially in relation to gmo foods.	0_1.3.8.6.	The EU has a policy of agricultural protectionism under the guise of quality and safety standards, especially in relation to GMO foods.	pro	
the decision to leave the party will be insignificant in comparison to the conduct of the nation's representatives throughout the withdrawal negotiations.	0_1.3.9.	The decision to leave the party will be insignificant in comparison to the conduct of the nation's representatives throughout the withdrawal negotiations.	pro	
brexit has inspired far-right movements in europe.	0_1.4.	Brexit has inspired far-right movements in Europe.	con	Far right movements were present before Brexit, and seem to be more associated with frustrations regarding EU policy.	Far-right groups all over Europe celebrate the victory of the Brexit vote.	Hate crime and racial violence has surged since around the time of the Referendum.	Brexit is a democratic decision that will address those negative feelings in a positive, constructive way and will actually defuse the rise of the far-right in the UK rather than promote it.
far right movements were present before brexit, and seem to be more associated with frustrations regarding eu policy.	0_1.4.1.	Far right movements were present before Brexit, and seem to be more associated with frustrations regarding EU policy.	pro	
far-right groups all over europe celebrate the victory of the brexit vote.	0_1.4.2.	Far-right groups all over Europe celebrate the victory of the Brexit vote.	con	France’s Front National (FN) hailed Brexit as a clear boost for Marine Le Pen’s presidential bid next spring, as well as a move that gave momentum to the party’s anti-Europe and anti-immigration line.	The far right Sweden Democrats, who hold the balance of power in Stockholm, tweeted: “Congratulations to Britain’s people on choosing independence! Now we are waiting for a #swexit!”	In the Netherlands, the far right and anti-immigration leader, Geert Wilders called for a referendum on Dutch membership of the EU following the Brexit vote.
france’s front national (fn) hailed brexit as a clear boost for marine le pen’s presidential bid next spring, as well as a move that gave momentum to the party’s anti-europe and anti-immigration line.	0_1.4.2.1.	France’s Front National (FN) hailed Brexit as a clear boost for Marine Le Pen’s presidential bid next spring, as well as a move that gave momentum to the party’s anti-Europe and anti-immigration line.	con	
the far right sweden democrats, who hold the balance of power in stockholm, tweeted: “congratulations to britain’s people on choosing independence! now we are waiting for a #swexit!”	0_1.4.2.2.	The far right Sweden Democrats, who hold the balance of power in Stockholm, tweeted: “Congratulations to Britain’s people on choosing independence! Now we are waiting for a #swexit!”	con	
in the netherlands, the far right and anti-immigration leader, geert wilders called for a referendum on dutch membership of the eu following the brexit vote.	0_1.4.2.3.	In the Netherlands, the far right and anti-immigration leader, Geert Wilders called for a referendum on Dutch membership of the EU following the Brexit vote.	con	
hate crime and racial violence has surged since around the time of the referendum.	0_1.4.3.	Hate crime and racial violence has surged since around the time of the Referendum.	con	In the 3 months after the referendum, more than 14,000 hate crimes have been reported which is more than a 50% increase on the previous 3 months.	Stop Hate UK has recorded an increase of 32% in reported hate crimes and racial violence overall after the Referendum.	The police forces in England have reported race and faith-based hate crimes increase by more than 40% since the Brexit vote.
in the 3 months after the referendum, more than 14,000 hate crimes have been reported which is more than a 50% increase on the previous 3 months.	0_1.4.3.1.	In the 3 months after the referendum, more than 14,000 hate crimes have been reported which is more than a 50% increase on the previous 3 months.	con	
stop hate uk has recorded an increase of 32% in reported hate crimes and racial violence overall after the referendum.	0_1.4.3.2.	Stop Hate UK has recorded an increase of 32% in reported hate crimes and racial violence overall after the Referendum.	con	
the police forces in england have reported race and faith-based hate crimes increase by more than 40% since the brexit vote.	0_1.4.3.3.	The police forces in England have reported race and faith-based hate crimes increase by more than 40% since the Brexit vote.	con	
brexit is a democratic decision that will address those negative feelings in a positive, constructive way and will actually defuse the rise of the far-right in the uk rather than promote it.	0_1.4.4.	Brexit is a democratic decision that will address those negative feelings in a positive, constructive way and will actually defuse the rise of the far-right in the UK rather than promote it.	pro	UKIP collapsed during and after the 2017 UK general election on a similar basis.	There was a sharp increase in hate crime and racist incidents following the referendum.	Appeasement never works.
ukip collapsed during and after the 2017 uk general election on a similar basis.	0_1.4.4.1.	UKIP collapsed during and after the 2017 UK general election on a similar basis.	pro	
there was a sharp increase in hate crime and racist incidents following the referendum.	0_1.4.4.2.	There was a sharp increase in hate crime and racist incidents following the referendum.	con	
appeasement never works.	0_1.4.4.3.	Appeasement never works.	con	
in the long term, it will provide economic value to the uk.	0_1.5.	In the long term, it will provide economic value to the UK.	pro	If any, it's going to take a lot of time before seeing the economic benefits.	Leaving the EU will provide lots of well paid UK jobs, paid by UK tax payers, as we duplicate existing things like the medicines agency, nuclear safety, air safety etc, as well as provide lots of work for lawyers who will need to re-write a lot of contracts. Duplicated British jobs for British people paid for by increasing British taxes.	The UK economy is faring badly and economic experts are warning that reversing Brexit is the way to solve that, not continuing.	The UK contributes more than it receives. Add in free movement and people using services they have not contributed to and the reason for services struggling becomes clear. The EU is draining us of financial resources. It will take some years to level itself, but the UK will be better off out.	OECD report suggests that Brexit with no deal (as the current outlook appears to be) would cost £40bn in lost growth by 2019. It will take a long time to see that recovered.	After Brexit the economy will take a large hit, each individual citizen will be poorer by even more than the average £600 a year each loss since the Brexit referendum, and there will be no 'Brexit Bonus' when we leave.	The pound sterling has already dropped from over 1.50 to 1.25 against the US dollar under its EU membership. In the long term, Brexit will help the currency regain its value.
if any, it's going to take a lot of time before seeing the economic benefits.	0_1.5.1.	If any, it's going to take a lot of time before seeing the economic benefits.	con	The global markets feel this financially as London, a leading global financial centre, is likely to diminish in its influence and posture. The flow of global funds may begin to find new harbours outside of the isolated London.	This is pure supposition.	It is hard to see how one could think that leaving an economic system that brought peace for over 50 years could bring any good.	The UK has already lost £500 million a week due to the decline in GDP growth relative to what it would have been if the vote hadn't occurred.	Under current statistics published by the UK government and other independent bodies, the UK economy will be comparatively worse off under Brexit than remaining within the EU.	The EU removed bureaucracy, for businesses and citizens by enabling the free movement of goods, services, cash and people. Brexit means bureaucracy.	There are other factors to consider, not just economic ones.
the global markets feel this financially as london, a leading global financial centre, is likely to diminish in its influence and posture. the flow of global funds may begin to find new harbours outside of the isolated london.	0_1.5.1.1.	The global markets feel this financially as London, a leading global financial centre, is likely to diminish in its influence and posture. The flow of global funds may begin to find new harbours outside of the isolated London.	con	The UK does not know what its doing. The reason why 'Pound' was so strong, was because big enterprises like Michelin, HSBC have their main Europe Headquarters there. Brexiting will cause loss of 1000's of jobs and the main companies headquarters moving to France and Germany.
the uk does not know what its doing. the reason why 'pound' was so strong, was because big enterprises like michelin, hsbc have their main europe headquarters there. brexiting will cause loss of 1000's of jobs and the main companies headquarters moving to france and germany.	0_1.5.1.1.1.	The UK does not know what its doing. The reason why 'Pound' was so strong, was because big enterprises like Michelin, HSBC have their main Europe Headquarters there. Brexiting will cause loss of 1000's of jobs and the main companies headquarters moving to France and Germany.	con	
this is pure supposition.	0_1.5.1.2.	This is pure supposition.	pro	The UK has already lost £500 million a week due to the decline in GDP growth relative to what it would have been if the vote hadn't occurred.	Under current statistics published by the UK government and other independent bodies, the UK economy will be comparatively worse off under Brexit than remaining within the EU.	There is no evidence to suggest there will ever be any economic benefits.
the uk has already lost £500 million a week due to the decline in gdp growth relative to what it would have been if the vote hadn't occurred.	0_1.5.1.2.1.	The UK has already lost £500 million a week due to the decline in GDP growth relative to what it would have been if the vote hadn't occurred.	con	The GBP will likely lose value in order to sustain trade.
the gbp will likely lose value in order to sustain trade.	0_1.5.1.2.1.1.	The GBP will likely lose value in order to sustain trade.	con	
under current statistics published by the uk government and other independent bodies, the uk economy will be comparatively worse off under brexit than remaining within the eu.	0_1.5.1.2.2.	Under current statistics published by the UK government and other independent bodies, the UK economy will be comparatively worse off under Brexit than remaining within the EU.	con	In the case of a "no deal" scenario, there is cliff edge risk. This will cost much more than any plausible and more optimistic benefit driven by Brexit.	Money lost during the years before tariffs and the costs of bureaucratic delays can be eliminated will cost us more on an ongoing basis from investments not made, savings not made by buying in bulk, and interest not earned.	Almost nobody who is not already a multi millionaire has any real chance of being better off even in the very long term if the UK leaves the EU. Unemployment will rise and the economy will never reach the potential it could have had staying in.	Brexit supporters are planning for 30 years of economic pain.
in the case of a "no deal" scenario, there is cliff edge risk. this will cost much more than any plausible and more optimistic benefit driven by brexit.	0_1.5.1.2.2.1.	In the case of a "no deal" scenario, there is cliff edge risk. This will cost much more than any plausible and more optimistic benefit driven by Brexit.	con	
money lost during the years before tariffs and the costs of bureaucratic delays can be eliminated will cost us more on an ongoing basis from investments not made, savings not made by buying in bulk, and interest not earned.	0_1.5.1.2.2.2.	Money lost during the years before tariffs and the costs of bureaucratic delays can be eliminated will cost us more on an ongoing basis from investments not made, savings not made by buying in bulk, and interest not earned.	con	
almost nobody who is not already a multi millionaire has any real chance of being better off even in the very long term if the uk leaves the eu. unemployment will rise and the economy will never reach the potential it could have had staying in.	0_1.5.1.2.2.3.	Almost nobody who is not already a multi millionaire has any real chance of being better off even in the very long term if the UK leaves the EU. Unemployment will rise and the economy will never reach the potential it could have had staying in.	con	
brexit supporters are planning for 30 years of economic pain.	0_1.5.1.2.2.4.	Brexit supporters are planning for 30 years of economic pain.	con	
there is no evidence to suggest there will ever be any economic benefits.	0_1.5.1.2.3.	There is no evidence to suggest there will ever be any economic benefits.	con	
it is hard to see how one could think that leaving an economic system that brought peace for over 50 years could bring any good.	0_1.5.1.3.	It is hard to see how one could think that leaving an economic system that brought peace for over 50 years could bring any good.	con	There is no evidence the EU, as opposed to NATO, has brought peace.	With the EU becoming "an ever closer union" it is not unthinkable that in maybe 50-100 years the EU will become a fully sovereign country. If that is something someone does not see as a positive thing, one might be right to consider leaving.	This seems an irrelevant point to the UK leaving unless there is concern that the EU27 will go to war with the UK, or vice versa.	Arguably, EU actions contibuted to the wars in the former Yugoslavia and more recently the civil war in Ukraine. Within the EU we have had terrorism in Spain and the UK.
there is no evidence the eu, as opposed to nato, has brought peace.	0_1.5.1.3.1.	There is no evidence the EU, as opposed to NATO, has brought peace.	pro	
with the eu becoming "an ever closer union" it is not unthinkable that in maybe 50-100 years the eu will become a fully sovereign country. if that is something someone does not see as a positive thing, one might be right to consider leaving.	0_1.5.1.3.2.	With the EU becoming "an ever closer union" it is not unthinkable that in maybe 50-100 years the EU will become a fully sovereign country. If that is something someone does not see as a positive thing, one might be right to consider leaving.	pro	-> See discussion #6351: The European Union should become a United States of Europe.
-> see discussion #6351: the european union should become a united states of europe.	0_1.5.1.3.2.1.	-> See discussion #6351: The European Union should become a United States of Europe.	pro	
this seems an irrelevant point to the uk leaving unless there is concern that the eu27 will go to war with the uk, or vice versa.	0_1.5.1.3.3.	This seems an irrelevant point to the UK leaving unless there is concern that the EU27 will go to war with the UK, or vice versa.	pro	
arguably, eu actions contibuted to the wars in the former yugoslavia and more recently the civil war in ukraine. within the eu we have had terrorism in spain and the uk.	0_1.5.1.3.4.	Arguably, EU actions contibuted to the wars in the former Yugoslavia and more recently the civil war in Ukraine. Within the EU we have had terrorism in Spain and the UK.	pro	The EU won the 2012 Nobel prize for the advancement of peace and reconciliation over 6 decades.	The weaknesses of the European Political Cooperation in the yugoslavia wars were addressed in the creation of the Common Foreign and Security Policy, as one of the three pillars of the European Union.	The Ukrainian situation remains complex and difficult and not solely the responsibility of the EU.	The EU had a role in building relationships leading into the Good Friday Agreement.	Terrorism also exists outside the EU.
the eu won the 2012 nobel prize for the advancement of peace and reconciliation over 6 decades.	0_1.5.1.3.4.1.	The EU won the 2012 Nobel prize for the advancement of peace and reconciliation over 6 decades.	con	
the weaknesses of the european political cooperation in the yugoslavia wars were addressed in the creation of the common foreign and security policy, as one of the three pillars of the european union.	0_1.5.1.3.4.2.	The weaknesses of the European Political Cooperation in the yugoslavia wars were addressed in the creation of the Common Foreign and Security Policy, as one of the three pillars of the European Union.	con	
the ukrainian situation remains complex and difficult and not solely the responsibility of the eu.	0_1.5.1.3.4.3.	The Ukrainian situation remains complex and difficult and not solely the responsibility of the EU.	con	
the eu had a role in building relationships leading into the good friday agreement.	0_1.5.1.3.4.4.	The EU had a role in building relationships leading into the Good Friday Agreement.	con	
terrorism also exists outside the eu.	0_1.5.1.3.4.5.	Terrorism also exists outside the EU.	con	
the eu removed bureaucracy, for businesses and citizens by enabling the free movement of goods, services, cash and people. brexit means bureaucracy.	0_1.5.1.6.	The EU removed bureaucracy, for businesses and citizens by enabling the free movement of goods, services, cash and people. Brexit means bureaucracy.	con	The advantage of the European Union and the single market is that it provides British companies with a much larger market for sales which will no longer be available under the same conditions. To sell into Europe will require Britain to pay unilaterally for the cost of developing standards and demonstrating compliance with EU standards.	Bureaucracy is job creation.
the advantage of the european union and the single market is that it provides british companies with a much larger market for sales which will no longer be available under the same conditions. to sell into europe will require britain to pay unilaterally for the cost of developing standards and demonstrating compliance with eu standards.	0_1.5.1.6.1.	The advantage of the European Union and the single market is that it provides British companies with a much larger market for sales which will no longer be available under the same conditions. To sell into Europe will require Britain to pay unilaterally for the cost of developing standards and demonstrating compliance with EU standards.	con	
bureaucracy is job creation.	0_1.5.1.6.2.	Bureaucracy is job creation.	pro	
there are other factors to consider, not just economic ones.	0_1.5.1.7.	There are other factors to consider, not just economic ones.	pro	For a country deeply divided by economic and social rifts, the Brexit decision was also about finding unity.
for a country deeply divided by economic and social rifts, the brexit decision was also about finding unity.	0_1.5.1.7.1.	For a country deeply divided by economic and social rifts, the Brexit decision was also about finding unity.	pro	
leaving the eu will provide lots of well paid uk jobs, paid by uk tax payers, as we duplicate existing things like the medicines agency, nuclear safety, air safety etc, as well as provide lots of work for lawyers who will need to re-write a lot of contracts. duplicated british jobs for british people paid for by increasing british taxes.	0_1.5.2.	Leaving the EU will provide lots of well paid UK jobs, paid by UK tax payers, as we duplicate existing things like the medicines agency, nuclear safety, air safety etc, as well as provide lots of work for lawyers who will need to re-write a lot of contracts. Duplicated British jobs for British people paid for by increasing British taxes.	pro	Having to spend money duplicating work is a net economic loss. The money would be better spent creating new opportunities, rather than trying to make up for the loss of old ones.	These services did not need duplication; and arguably if duplicated cannot function as well as the original, collaborative and integrated ones. Duplicating them will take time, leaving disorder (cost, time) in the meantime.
having to spend money duplicating work is a net economic loss. the money would be better spent creating new opportunities, rather than trying to make up for the loss of old ones.	0_1.5.2.1.	Having to spend money duplicating work is a net economic loss. The money would be better spent creating new opportunities, rather than trying to make up for the loss of old ones.	con	
these services did not need duplication; and arguably if duplicated cannot function as well as the original, collaborative and integrated ones. duplicating them will take time, leaving disorder (cost, time) in the meantime.	0_1.5.2.2.	These services did not need duplication; and arguably if duplicated cannot function as well as the original, collaborative and integrated ones. Duplicating them will take time, leaving disorder (cost, time) in the meantime.	con	Furthermore, medicines, aircraft and other products are only made by finite producers. These producers will align to the bigger market, not our peculiar, smaller one, because it will make no financial sense for them to do so. So we will have access to fewer or worse services.
furthermore, medicines, aircraft and other products are only made by finite producers. these producers will align to the bigger market, not our peculiar, smaller one, because it will make no financial sense for them to do so. so we will have access to fewer or worse services.	0_1.5.2.2.1.	Furthermore, medicines, aircraft and other products are only made by finite producers. These producers will align to the bigger market, not our peculiar, smaller one, because it will make no financial sense for them to do so. So we will have access to fewer or worse services.	con	
the uk economy is faring badly and economic experts are warning that reversing brexit is the way to solve that, not continuing.	0_1.5.3.	The UK economy is faring badly and economic experts are warning that reversing Brexit is the way to solve that, not continuing.	con	
the uk contributes more than it receives. add in free movement and people using services they have not contributed to and the reason for services struggling becomes clear. the eu is draining us of financial resources. it will take some years to level itself, but the uk will be better off out.	0_1.5.4.	The UK contributes more than it receives. Add in free movement and people using services they have not contributed to and the reason for services struggling becomes clear. The EU is draining us of financial resources. It will take some years to level itself, but the UK will be better off out.	pro	Our net contributions to the EU are around £9 billion a year, after the rebate and the money invested in the UK from the EU budget are taken into account. In return for this we have freedom of movement of goods, tariff free access to our largest trading partner, lack of mobile roaming charges in the EU and a variety of other benefits. Studies show that EU residents pay more tax than UK adults do. Yes, we pay for access, but we get benefits in return.
our net contributions to the eu are around £9 billion a year, after the rebate and the money invested in the uk from the eu budget are taken into account. in return for this we have freedom of movement of goods, tariff free access to our largest trading partner, lack of mobile roaming charges in the eu and a variety of other benefits. studies show that eu residents pay more tax than uk adults do. yes, we pay for access, but we get benefits in return.	0_1.5.4.1.	Our net contributions to the EU are around £9 billion a year, after the rebate and the money invested in the UK from the EU budget are taken into account. In return for this we have freedom of movement of goods, tariff free access to our largest trading partner, lack of mobile roaming charges in the EU and a variety of other benefits. Studies show that EU residents pay more tax than UK adults do. Yes, we pay for access, but we get benefits in return.	con	
oecd report suggests that brexit with no deal (as the current outlook appears to be) would cost £40bn in lost growth by 2019. it will take a long time to see that recovered.	0_1.5.5.	OECD report suggests that Brexit with no deal (as the current outlook appears to be) would cost £40bn in lost growth by 2019. It will take a long time to see that recovered.	con	
after brexit the economy will take a large hit, each individual citizen will be poorer by even more than the average £600 a year each loss since the brexit referendum, and there will be no 'brexit bonus' when we leave.	0_1.5.6.	After Brexit the economy will take a large hit, each individual citizen will be poorer by even more than the average £600 a year each loss since the Brexit referendum, and there will be no 'Brexit Bonus' when we leave.	con	
the pound sterling has already dropped from over 1.50 to 1.25 against the us dollar under its eu membership. in the long term, brexit will help the currency regain its value.	0_1.5.7.	The pound sterling has already dropped from over 1.50 to 1.25 against the US dollar under its EU membership. In the long term, Brexit will help the currency regain its value.	pro	
the uk will have more freedom and sovereignty to make decisions that will make a difference, without vetting of the eu.	0_1.6.	The UK will have more freedom and sovereignty to make decisions that will make a difference, without vetting of the EU.	pro	Stepping out of the EU will likely result in a trade-deal like that of Norway; they are very costly and come with a lot of similar restrictions to being in the EU. So basically the only real difference that results of Brexit, is that the UK no longer has a vote regarding European issues. Issues that clearly do concern the UK.	The UK will have less influence internationally, hence less influence over matters that make a difference.	UK would get more sovereignty of their own borders again, getting to be more selective of who can come into their country.	The UK wouldn't have to pay 12+/-billions a year to the EU, which means less tax for taxpayers.	The UK would get full rights to their own fishing waters, and won't have to toss out tons of dead fish just because they were the wrong kind of fish/went over the quota of fish they could catch.	The EU's copyright bill, which includes article 11 (link tax) and 13 (upload filter), will greatly affect how we use the internet; this is reason enough to leave the EU.	Currently, Parliamentary sovereignty is being subverted by the Government, not the EU. Parliament's power to block no-deal and even to reverse Brexit (which has a Parliamentary majority) is being usurped.	The UK's political system is flawed. Parliament does not accurately reflect how people voted. In the first-past-the-post system, many often claim to vote tactically or make protest votes as a form of punishment or sending a message. The young people and EU citizens who will be most affected by Brexit could not vote. Consequently, many of them will disagree with the claim that they have more freedom or sovereignty.	The UK will have more freedom to negotiate trade deals. The EU has not been proactive enough at this.	The number of areas of policy where the EU has competency to make laws has steadily grown over time from 11 areas in the original 1957 Treaty of Rome, to 27 areas at the Treaty of Lisbon. This represents a gradual shift in sovereignty away from the UK parliament and towards the EU institutions.	Sovereignty is an emotive term - in reality, no nation is truly sovereign as it is constrained by multiple supranational treaties, designed, like the EU, for the common good.
stepping out of the eu will likely result in a trade-deal like that of norway; they are very costly and come with a lot of similar restrictions to being in the eu. so basically the only real difference that results of brexit, is that the uk no longer has a vote regarding european issues. issues that clearly do concern the uk.	0_1.6.1.	Stepping out of the EU will likely result in a trade-deal like that of Norway; they are very costly and come with a lot of similar restrictions to being in the EU. So basically the only real difference that results of Brexit, is that the UK no longer has a vote regarding European issues. Issues that clearly do concern the UK.	con	
the uk will have less influence internationally, hence less influence over matters that make a difference.	0_1.6.2.	The UK will have less influence internationally, hence less influence over matters that make a difference.	con	The UK will continue to have a seat at the G7, the G20 and the UN security council. All this from the world's 5th largest economy. Added to this, the UK stands at the top of the Soft Power 30 list of 2018. Surely this is convincing evidence enough that the UK can make a success out of itself outside the realm of an integrationist political union.
the uk will continue to have a seat at the g7, the g20 and the un security council. all this from the world's 5th largest economy. added to this, the uk stands at the top of the soft power 30 list of 2018. surely this is convincing evidence enough that the uk can make a success out of itself outside the realm of an integrationist political union.	0_1.6.2.1.	The UK will continue to have a seat at the G7, the G20 and the UN security council. All this from the world's 5th largest economy. Added to this, the UK stands at the top of the Soft Power 30 list of 2018. Surely this is convincing evidence enough that the UK can make a success out of itself outside the realm of an integrationist political union.	pro	
uk would get more sovereignty of their own borders again, getting to be more selective of who can come into their country.	0_1.6.3.	UK would get more sovereignty of their own borders again, getting to be more selective of who can come into their country.	pro	With no more open border policy there would be less immigration; less immigration means citizens will have less competition for jobs.	The UK government has complete control over non-EU migration, yet has done little to limit it. There is no reason to think that this would change post-Brexit, in fact restrictions may be relaxed to encourage skilled workers to come.	UK immigration policy is driven by xenophobia and racism, so loss of freedom of movement is only likely to make it worse.	UK citizens will lose their freedom of movement rights as well, limiting their ability to travel and live/work in other countries.	Immigration laws for non-EU immigrants are unlikely to change. The change in immigration laws for EU immigrants means that the UK becomes less attractive and, therefore, highly skilled EU immigrants are more likely to leave the country (as they have other options) and new one prefer other countries, with a less hostile environment. blogs.lse.ac.uk
with no more open border policy there would be less immigration; less immigration means citizens will have less competition for jobs.	0_1.6.3.1.	With no more open border policy there would be less immigration; less immigration means citizens will have less competition for jobs.	pro	Research has indicated that immigration has little impact on jobs and wages.	The EU accounts for less than half of our immigration numbers, and immigration from outside the EU, which has entirely been under the Government's control has risen, so there is no evidence that the Government having complete control over borders will lead to a drop in immigration.	Immigrants are mainly in jobs that locals either don't want to do (low paid, low qualifications) or cannot do with the qualifications they already hold (high skilled jobs).	Bringing high skilled professionals from somewhere else means that the government is saving money as they don't need to train those workers.
research has indicated that immigration has little impact on jobs and wages.	0_1.6.3.1.1.	Research has indicated that immigration has little impact on jobs and wages.	con	
the eu accounts for less than half of our immigration numbers, and immigration from outside the eu, which has entirely been under the government's control has risen, so there is no evidence that the government having complete control over borders will lead to a drop in immigration.	0_1.6.3.1.2.	The EU accounts for less than half of our immigration numbers, and immigration from outside the EU, which has entirely been under the Government's control has risen, so there is no evidence that the Government having complete control over borders will lead to a drop in immigration.	con	
immigrants are mainly in jobs that locals either don't want to do (low paid, low qualifications) or cannot do with the qualifications they already hold (high skilled jobs).	0_1.6.3.1.3.	Immigrants are mainly in jobs that locals either don't want to do (low paid, low qualifications) or cannot do with the qualifications they already hold (high skilled jobs).	con	
bringing high skilled professionals from somewhere else means that the government is saving money as they don't need to train those workers.	0_1.6.3.1.4.	Bringing high skilled professionals from somewhere else means that the government is saving money as they don't need to train those workers.	con	
the uk government has complete control over non-eu migration, yet has done little to limit it. there is no reason to think that this would change post-brexit, in fact restrictions may be relaxed to encourage skilled workers to come.	0_1.6.3.2.	The UK government has complete control over non-EU migration, yet has done little to limit it. There is no reason to think that this would change post-Brexit, in fact restrictions may be relaxed to encourage skilled workers to come.	con	
uk immigration policy is driven by xenophobia and racism, so loss of freedom of movement is only likely to make it worse.	0_1.6.3.3.	UK immigration policy is driven by xenophobia and racism, so loss of freedom of movement is only likely to make it worse.	con	The UK needs migrants for its economy and NHS, and replacing Europeans with South Asians and Africans is unlikely to please racists and xenophobes.	A subjective quote from an EU-phile like Cable does not suffice as evidence that the UK's current immigration policy is, in any way, driven by racism.	The hostile environment policy, which has led to victims not reporting crime, contributes to homelessness and leaves people open to exploitation, is driven by a government pandering to the views of people who don't know what they're worried about, whose negative attitudes towards immigration aren't based in reality.
the uk needs migrants for its economy and nhs, and replacing europeans with south asians and africans is unlikely to please racists and xenophobes.	0_1.6.3.3.1.	The UK needs migrants for its economy and NHS, and replacing Europeans with South Asians and Africans is unlikely to please racists and xenophobes.	con	
a subjective quote from an eu-phile like cable does not suffice as evidence that the uk's current immigration policy is, in any way, driven by racism.	0_1.6.3.3.2.	A subjective quote from an EU-phile like Cable does not suffice as evidence that the UK's current immigration policy is, in any way, driven by racism.	pro	
the hostile environment policy, which has led to victims not reporting crime, contributes to homelessness and leaves people open to exploitation, is driven by a government pandering to the views of people who don't know what they're worried about, whose negative attitudes towards immigration aren't based in reality.	0_1.6.3.3.3.	The hostile environment policy, which has led to victims not reporting crime, contributes to homelessness and leaves people open to exploitation, is driven by a government pandering to the views of people who don't know what they're worried about, whose negative attitudes towards immigration aren't based in reality.	con	
uk citizens will lose their freedom of movement rights as well, limiting their ability to travel and live/work in other countries.	0_1.6.3.4.	UK citizens will lose their freedom of movement rights as well, limiting their ability to travel and live/work in other countries.	con	Complete loss of freedom of movement rights would result in a flood of over a million UK citizens being forced to return, many of them elderly and homeless and in need of expensive care.
complete loss of freedom of movement rights would result in a flood of over a million uk citizens being forced to return, many of them elderly and homeless and in need of expensive care.	0_1.6.3.4.1.	Complete loss of freedom of movement rights would result in a flood of over a million UK citizens being forced to return, many of them elderly and homeless and in need of expensive care.	con	
immigration laws for non-eu immigrants are unlikely to change. the change in immigration laws for eu immigrants means that the uk becomes less attractive and, therefore, highly skilled eu immigrants are more likely to leave the country (as they have other options) and new one prefer other countries, with a less hostile environment. blogs.lse.ac.uk	0_1.6.3.5.	Immigration laws for non-EU immigrants are unlikely to change. The change in immigration laws for EU immigrants means that the UK becomes less attractive and, therefore, highly skilled EU immigrants are more likely to leave the country (as they have other options) and new one prefer other countries, with a less hostile environment. blogs.lse.ac.uk	con	
the uk wouldn't have to pay 12+/-billions a year to the eu, which means less tax for taxpayers.	0_1.6.4.	The UK wouldn't have to pay 12+/-billions a year to the EU, which means less tax for taxpayers.	pro	This is simply incorrect. Brexit is more likely to lead to tax hikes and reduced spending than reduced taxes.	The UK will continue to pay much of that, to cover existing commitments and for access to organisations and schemes that it needs.
this is simply incorrect. brexit is more likely to lead to tax hikes and reduced spending than reduced taxes.	0_1.6.4.1.	This is simply incorrect. Brexit is more likely to lead to tax hikes and reduced spending than reduced taxes.	con	
the uk will continue to pay much of that, to cover existing commitments and for access to organisations and schemes that it needs.	0_1.6.4.2.	The UK will continue to pay much of that, to cover existing commitments and for access to organisations and schemes that it needs.	con	
the uk would get full rights to their own fishing waters, and won't have to toss out tons of dead fish just because they were the wrong kind of fish/went over the quota of fish they could catch.	0_1.6.5.	The UK would get full rights to their own fishing waters, and won't have to toss out tons of dead fish just because they were the wrong kind of fish/went over the quota of fish they could catch.	pro	These EU strictures exist for a reason. Overfishing is a serious issue and the UK will still have to enforce some limits.	The UK will lose access to EU fishing waters unless it trades away some of its own, so won't ultimately end up any better off.	Fish move around, and outside the EU, the UK will have greatly reduced ability to protect areas where fish mature before moving to UK waters where they can be caught.
these eu strictures exist for a reason. overfishing is a serious issue and the uk will still have to enforce some limits.	0_1.6.5.1.	These EU strictures exist for a reason. Overfishing is a serious issue and the UK will still have to enforce some limits.	con	The current state of fisheries is bad. (1 It's assumed that by 2048 lots of fisheries will have collapsed due to overfishing.
the current state of fisheries is bad. (1 it's assumed that by 2048 lots of fisheries will have collapsed due to overfishing.	0_1.6.5.1.1.	The current state of fisheries is bad. (1 It's assumed that by 2048 lots of fisheries will have collapsed due to overfishing.	con	
the uk will lose access to eu fishing waters unless it trades away some of its own, so won't ultimately end up any better off.	0_1.6.5.2.	The UK will lose access to EU fishing waters unless it trades away some of its own, so won't ultimately end up any better off.	con	
fish move around, and outside the eu, the uk will have greatly reduced ability to protect areas where fish mature before moving to uk waters where they can be caught.	0_1.6.5.3.	Fish move around, and outside the EU, the UK will have greatly reduced ability to protect areas where fish mature before moving to UK waters where they can be caught.	con	
the eu's copyright bill, which includes article 11 (link tax) and 13 (upload filter), will greatly affect how we use the internet; this is reason enough to leave the eu.	0_1.6.6.	The EU's copyright bill, which includes article 11 (link tax) and 13 (upload filter), will greatly affect how we use the internet; this is reason enough to leave the EU.	pro	This would be good for online DJs, since Copyright Laws get in the way of their performance and it is often taken down.	A single measure is not sufficient reason to leave the entire union.	The copyright seeks to protect artists, writers, filmmakers, musicians, photographers and journalists. The UK is one of the world's leading creative hubs and therefore many of its citizens, news agencies and small businesses would benefit from increased copyright protection of this nature. By staying within the EU, the UK could continue to influence the nature of this law, rather than just being a rule-taker on the outside.
this would be good for online djs, since copyright laws get in the way of their performance and it is often taken down.	0_1.6.6.1.	This would be good for online DJs, since Copyright Laws get in the way of their performance and it is often taken down.	pro	
a single measure is not sufficient reason to leave the entire union.	0_1.6.6.2.	A single measure is not sufficient reason to leave the entire union.	con	
the copyright seeks to protect artists, writers, filmmakers, musicians, photographers and journalists. the uk is one of the world's leading creative hubs and therefore many of its citizens, news agencies and small businesses would benefit from increased copyright protection of this nature. by staying within the eu, the uk could continue to influence the nature of this law, rather than just being a rule-taker on the outside.	0_1.6.6.3.	The copyright seeks to protect artists, writers, filmmakers, musicians, photographers and journalists. The UK is one of the world's leading creative hubs and therefore many of its citizens, news agencies and small businesses would benefit from increased copyright protection of this nature. By staying within the EU, the UK could continue to influence the nature of this law, rather than just being a rule-taker on the outside.	con	
currently, parliamentary sovereignty is being subverted by the government, not the eu. parliament's power to block no-deal and even to reverse brexit (which has a parliamentary majority) is being usurped.	0_1.6.7.	Currently, Parliamentary sovereignty is being subverted by the Government, not the EU. Parliament's power to block no-deal and even to reverse Brexit (which has a Parliamentary majority) is being usurped.	con	However, Parliament voted to trigger Article 50, when they could have voted against. We have sufficient legal protection and independence in our courts, in the House of Lords and even in the House of Commons to ensure the government cannot ignore Parliament.
however, parliament voted to trigger article 50, when they could have voted against. we have sufficient legal protection and independence in our courts, in the house of lords and even in the house of commons to ensure the government cannot ignore parliament.	0_1.6.7.1.	However, Parliament voted to trigger Article 50, when they could have voted against. We have sufficient legal protection and independence in our courts, in the House of Lords and even in the House of Commons to ensure the government cannot ignore Parliament.	pro	
the uk's political system is flawed. parliament does not accurately reflect how people voted. in the first-past-the-post system, many often claim to vote tactically or make protest votes as a form of punishment or sending a message. the young people and eu citizens who will be most affected by brexit could not vote. consequently, many of them will disagree with the claim that they have more freedom or sovereignty.	0_1.6.8.	The UK's political system is flawed. Parliament does not accurately reflect how people voted. In the first-past-the-post system, many often claim to vote tactically or make protest votes as a form of punishment or sending a message. The young people and EU citizens who will be most affected by Brexit could not vote. Consequently, many of them will disagree with the claim that they have more freedom or sovereignty.	con	
the uk will have more freedom to negotiate trade deals. the eu has not been proactive enough at this.	0_1.6.9.	The UK will have more freedom to negotiate trade deals. The EU has not been proactive enough at this.	pro	The UK's trades with the EU account for more than 40% of its exports.	It provides an opportunity to sign stronger trade deals with the US.	The EU has just signed a huge trade deal with Japan which the UK will soon no longer benefit from.	It appears that the ruling Conservative party in the UK is still split over Brexit, as evidenced by the reaction to the Prime Minister's proposals. A divided Government will find it difficult to negotiate favourable terms.	Currently, any new trade deals will be signed while the UK has a significantly smaller economy and therefore weaker negotiating stance. The UK will have freedom to negotiate different trade deals, but they may well be worse than what we can achieve from within the EU.	Within the EU, trade deals have to be ratified by all member states. For some states, this also implies ratification by regional parliaments within the states. This need for unanimity necessarily means that negotiations take longer and are less tailored towards the specific needs of individual member states.
the uk's trades with the eu account for more than 40% of its exports.	0_1.6.9.1.	The UK's trades with the EU account for more than 40% of its exports.	con	
it provides an opportunity to sign stronger trade deals with the us.	0_1.6.9.2.	It provides an opportunity to sign stronger trade deals with the US.	pro	The US is becoming more isolationist in its trade policies.	The UK, outside of the EU, has less to offer the US in both market size and geopolitical influence. Thus it will get less favorable terms than as part of the EU.	Trump has promised better trade deals after Brexit.
the us is becoming more isolationist in its trade policies.	0_1.6.9.2.1.	The US is becoming more isolationist in its trade policies.	con	
the uk, outside of the eu, has less to offer the us in both market size and geopolitical influence. thus it will get less favorable terms than as part of the eu.	0_1.6.9.2.2.	The UK, outside of the EU, has less to offer the US in both market size and geopolitical influence. Thus it will get less favorable terms than as part of the EU.	con	
trump has promised better trade deals after brexit.	0_1.6.9.2.3.	Trump has promised better trade deals after Brexit.	pro	Not everything Donald Trump says is true.
not everything donald trump says is true.	0_1.6.9.2.3.1.	Not everything Donald Trump says is true.	con	
the eu has just signed a huge trade deal with japan which the uk will soon no longer benefit from.	0_1.6.9.3.	The EU has just signed a huge trade deal with Japan which the UK will soon no longer benefit from.	con	This trade deal could create greater incentives for Japanese countries to invest in the EU27, rather than Britain. If the UK do not replicate the EU's trade deal with Japan, it "could clearly see investment flowing to countries in the single market."
this trade deal could create greater incentives for japanese countries to invest in the eu27, rather than britain. if the uk do not replicate the eu's trade deal with japan, it "could clearly see investment flowing to countries in the single market."	0_1.6.9.3.1.	This trade deal could create greater incentives for Japanese countries to invest in the EU27, rather than Britain. If the UK do not replicate the EU's trade deal with Japan, it "could clearly see investment flowing to countries in the single market."	con	
it appears that the ruling conservative party in the uk is still split over brexit, as evidenced by the reaction to the prime minister's proposals. a divided government will find it difficult to negotiate favourable terms.	0_1.6.9.4.	It appears that the ruling Conservative party in the UK is still split over Brexit, as evidenced by the reaction to the Prime Minister's proposals. A divided Government will find it difficult to negotiate favourable terms.	con	
currently, any new trade deals will be signed while the uk has a significantly smaller economy and therefore weaker negotiating stance. the uk will have freedom to negotiate different trade deals, but they may well be worse than what we can achieve from within the eu.	0_1.6.9.5.	Currently, any new trade deals will be signed while the UK has a significantly smaller economy and therefore weaker negotiating stance. The UK will have freedom to negotiate different trade deals, but they may well be worse than what we can achieve from within the EU.	con	The UK will lose the freedom to trade with the largest trading bloc in the world; or will have to re-negotiate that at a greater cost than already exists.	The colossal size of the EU market, compared to the UK alone, gives EU deals more potential negotiation power.	Bombardier is a Canadian company, not a UK one.
the uk will lose the freedom to trade with the largest trading bloc in the world; or will have to re-negotiate that at a greater cost than already exists.	0_1.6.9.5.1.	The UK will lose the freedom to trade with the largest trading bloc in the world; or will have to re-negotiate that at a greater cost than already exists.	con	
the colossal size of the eu market, compared to the uk alone, gives eu deals more potential negotiation power.	0_1.6.9.5.2.	The colossal size of the EU market, compared to the UK alone, gives EU deals more potential negotiation power.	con	
bombardier is a canadian company, not a uk one.	0_1.6.9.5.3.	Bombardier is a Canadian company, not a UK one.	pro	But it does employ 3,500 people in the UK.
but it does employ 3,500 people in the uk.	0_1.6.9.5.3.1.	But it does employ 3,500 people in the UK.	con	
within the eu, trade deals have to be ratified by all member states. for some states, this also implies ratification by regional parliaments within the states. this need for unanimity necessarily means that negotiations take longer and are less tailored towards the specific needs of individual member states.	0_1.6.9.6.	Within the EU, trade deals have to be ratified by all member states. For some states, this also implies ratification by regional parliaments within the states. This need for unanimity necessarily means that negotiations take longer and are less tailored towards the specific needs of individual member states.	pro	The biggest trade deal that the UK has to negotiate after Brexit is with the EU, so the issue of delay caused by the EU's requirement for unanimity applies in some measure to the UK outside the EU as well.
the biggest trade deal that the uk has to negotiate after brexit is with the eu, so the issue of delay caused by the eu's requirement for unanimity applies in some measure to the uk outside the eu as well.	0_1.6.9.6.1.	The biggest trade deal that the UK has to negotiate after Brexit is with the EU, so the issue of delay caused by the EU's requirement for unanimity applies in some measure to the UK outside the EU as well.	con	
the number of areas of policy where the eu has competency to make laws has steadily grown over time from 11 areas in the original 1957 treaty of rome, to 27 areas at the treaty of lisbon. this represents a gradual shift in sovereignty away from the uk parliament and towards the eu institutions.	0_1.6.10.	The number of areas of policy where the EU has competency to make laws has steadily grown over time from 11 areas in the original 1957 Treaty of Rome, to 27 areas at the Treaty of Lisbon. This represents a gradual shift in sovereignty away from the UK parliament and towards the EU institutions.	pro	Lots of these areas of competence establish global standards, by the sheer size of the EU, and the UK is leaving the table where it is decided, and so will necessarily become a rule taker not a rule maker.	A small sovereign country can make quick decisions and be more flexible. In a fast changing world this is more beneficial to the citizens of that country then being part of a massive union where your voice is one of many.	Such a move by the EU was done in full agreement and the option to veto from the UK at every step.	The EU is not a democratic institution. Only the unelected European Commission can decide the agenda, by proposing legislation. The European Parliament can only slow down their agenda by vetoing it - they cannot stop the agenda, and certainly cannot change it.	As part of the EU, UK was part of the global evolution. It is not about EU ruling the UK, but about common share of ideology.	Nations, as fully formed sovereign entities so prized by a fervent right wing, have not existed for very long in the grand scheme of things. The development of legal jurisdictions has developed along with greater complexity of human societies and tended towards centralisation.
lots of these areas of competence establish global standards, by the sheer size of the eu, and the uk is leaving the table where it is decided, and so will necessarily become a rule taker not a rule maker.	0_1.6.10.1.	Lots of these areas of competence establish global standards, by the sheer size of the EU, and the UK is leaving the table where it is decided, and so will necessarily become a rule taker not a rule maker.	con	
a small sovereign country can make quick decisions and be more flexible. in a fast changing world this is more beneficial to the citizens of that country then being part of a massive union where your voice is one of many.	0_1.6.10.2.	A small sovereign country can make quick decisions and be more flexible. In a fast changing world this is more beneficial to the citizens of that country then being part of a massive union where your voice is one of many.	pro	Stability is good for citizens, especially workers who rely on strong employment rights. Flexibility usually just means taking away important rights and protections.	The UK is a small land mass, but it has a high population and is a G8 country. It has power, influence and agility already. If it remained part of the EU, it could exert that power and influence on the largest trading bloc in the world whilst also retaining benefits and freedoms within the bloc.	A good example of such a decision-making flexibility is New Zealand.
stability is good for citizens, especially workers who rely on strong employment rights. flexibility usually just means taking away important rights and protections.	0_1.6.10.2.1.	Stability is good for citizens, especially workers who rely on strong employment rights. Flexibility usually just means taking away important rights and protections.	con	
the uk is a small land mass, but it has a high population and is a g8 country. it has power, influence and agility already. if it remained part of the eu, it could exert that power and influence on the largest trading bloc in the world whilst also retaining benefits and freedoms within the bloc.	0_1.6.10.2.2.	The UK is a small land mass, but it has a high population and is a G8 country. It has power, influence and agility already. If it remained part of the EU, it could exert that power and influence on the largest trading bloc in the world whilst also retaining benefits and freedoms within the bloc.	con	Freedom of movement of goods and labor within the EU, freedoms of lower prices, increase standards and increase opportunity are some of the benefits the UK is able to get by being a part of the EU.
freedom of movement of goods and labor within the eu, freedoms of lower prices, increase standards and increase opportunity are some of the benefits the uk is able to get by being a part of the eu.	0_1.6.10.2.2.1.	Freedom of movement of goods and labor within the EU, freedoms of lower prices, increase standards and increase opportunity are some of the benefits the UK is able to get by being a part of the EU.	con	
a good example of such a decision-making flexibility is new zealand.	0_1.6.10.2.3.	A good example of such a decision-making flexibility is New Zealand.	pro	
such a move by the eu was done in full agreement and the option to veto from the uk at every step.	0_1.6.10.3.	Such a move by the EU was done in full agreement and the option to veto from the UK at every step.	con	
the eu is not a democratic institution. only the unelected european commission can decide the agenda, by proposing legislation. the european parliament can only slow down their agenda by vetoing it - they cannot stop the agenda, and certainly cannot change it.	0_1.6.10.4.	The EU is not a democratic institution. Only the unelected European Commission can decide the agenda, by proposing legislation. The European Parliament can only slow down their agenda by vetoing it - they cannot stop the agenda, and certainly cannot change it.	pro	The UK will no longer be under the authority of the European Courts and legislation made locally will have primacy. This will increase the power of democratic decisions and foster democratic involvement.	Every member of the commission is appointed by an elected body. Who gets appointed is decided by who voters choose as their government in each member state.	The lack of a direct vote for the European commission is troublesome, however would it not be better to change this from the inside of the EU, rather than throw the whole thing away and start again.	The EU leaders are not elected by the British people and should not dictate over them.	The European Commission can always resubmitting its rejected proposals under different wording, and it only takes one successful vote to secure it forever, regardless of how many failed votes beforehand.
the uk will no longer be under the authority of the european courts and legislation made locally will have primacy. this will increase the power of democratic decisions and foster democratic involvement.	0_1.6.10.4.1.	The UK will no longer be under the authority of the European Courts and legislation made locally will have primacy. This will increase the power of democratic decisions and foster democratic involvement.	pro	This will result in the loss of vital protections and human rights that are enforced by the European Courts.	Not all courts with "European" in the name, and whose judgements the government agrees to abide by, are EU related; these would not be affected by Brexit.
this will result in the loss of vital protections and human rights that are enforced by the european courts.	0_1.6.10.4.1.1.	This will result in the loss of vital protections and human rights that are enforced by the European Courts.	con	
not all courts with "european" in the name, and whose judgements the government agrees to abide by, are eu related; these would not be affected by brexit.	0_1.6.10.4.1.2.	Not all courts with "European" in the name, and whose judgements the government agrees to abide by, are EU related; these would not be affected by Brexit.	con	The European Court of Human Rights, for example, is a part of the UK's Council of Europe membership and treaties.
the european court of human rights, for example, is a part of the uk's council of europe membership and treaties.	0_1.6.10.4.1.2.1.	The European Court of Human Rights, for example, is a part of the UK's Council of Europe membership and treaties.	con	
every member of the commission is appointed by an elected body. who gets appointed is decided by who voters choose as their government in each member state.	0_1.6.10.4.2.	Every member of the commission is appointed by an elected body. Who gets appointed is decided by who voters choose as their government in each member state.	con	
the lack of a direct vote for the european commission is troublesome, however would it not be better to change this from the inside of the eu, rather than throw the whole thing away and start again.	0_1.6.10.4.3.	The lack of a direct vote for the European commission is troublesome, however would it not be better to change this from the inside of the EU, rather than throw the whole thing away and start again.	con	The House of Lords is unelected and yet the UK has decided to begin reforming it, instead of throwing the whole idea of the UK out the window.
the house of lords is unelected and yet the uk has decided to begin reforming it, instead of throwing the whole idea of the uk out the window.	0_1.6.10.4.3.1.	The House of Lords is unelected and yet the UK has decided to begin reforming it, instead of throwing the whole idea of the UK out the window.	con	
the eu leaders are not elected by the british people and should not dictate over them.	0_1.6.10.4.4.	The EU leaders are not elected by the British people and should not dictate over them.	pro	Members of the European Parliament are elected and have the right to govern over all countries in the EU, not just Britain.	All EU leaders are either directly elected (MEPs, heads of state) or appointed by elected officials.
members of the european parliament are elected and have the right to govern over all countries in the eu, not just britain.	0_1.6.10.4.4.1.	Members of the European Parliament are elected and have the right to govern over all countries in the EU, not just Britain.	con	
all eu leaders are either directly elected (meps, heads of state) or appointed by elected officials.	0_1.6.10.4.4.2.	All EU leaders are either directly elected (MEPs, heads of state) or appointed by elected officials.	con	
the european commission can always resubmitting its rejected proposals under different wording, and it only takes one successful vote to secure it forever, regardless of how many failed votes beforehand.	0_1.6.10.4.5.	The European Commission can always resubmitting its rejected proposals under different wording, and it only takes one successful vote to secure it forever, regardless of how many failed votes beforehand.	pro	
as part of the eu, uk was part of the global evolution. it is not about eu ruling the uk, but about common share of ideology.	0_1.6.10.5.	As part of the EU, UK was part of the global evolution. It is not about EU ruling the UK, but about common share of ideology.	con	
nations, as fully formed sovereign entities so prized by a fervent right wing, have not existed for very long in the grand scheme of things. the development of legal jurisdictions has developed along with greater complexity of human societies and tended towards centralisation.	0_1.6.10.6.	Nations, as fully formed sovereign entities so prized by a fervent right wing, have not existed for very long in the grand scheme of things. The development of legal jurisdictions has developed along with greater complexity of human societies and tended towards centralisation.	con	
sovereignty is an emotive term - in reality, no nation is truly sovereign as it is constrained by multiple supranational treaties, designed, like the eu, for the common good.	0_1.6.11.	Sovereignty is an emotive term - in reality, no nation is truly sovereign as it is constrained by multiple supranational treaties, designed, like the EU, for the common good.	con	The complexity and depth of the UK's relationship with its closest trading partners is reflected in laws and regulations. Without them - every interaction has friction. The benefits of common laws and regulations are massive and tangible, whereas 'sovereignty' is subjective and ill-defined	Common good is an emotive term - in reality, the intent of design of a supranational treaty will not necessarily correlate with its actual results, and in fact it might be an obstacle since fervent actions taken with emotion might be difficult to let go by its proponents even when facing failure multiple times.	Sovereignty is a real thing, used to create and agree to relationships. All wills (individual or group) are sovereign since it is only that will that can decide if it agreements are honored that were made in the past, present and into the future.	UK's sovereignty may be mitigated as it signs new trade deals, each with its own demands and restrictions.
the complexity and depth of the uk's relationship with its closest trading partners is reflected in laws and regulations. without them - every interaction has friction. the benefits of common laws and regulations are massive and tangible, whereas 'sovereignty' is subjective and ill-defined	0_1.6.11.1.	The complexity and depth of the UK's relationship with its closest trading partners is reflected in laws and regulations. Without them - every interaction has friction. The benefits of common laws and regulations are massive and tangible, whereas 'sovereignty' is subjective and ill-defined	con	
common good is an emotive term - in reality, the intent of design of a supranational treaty will not necessarily correlate with its actual results, and in fact it might be an obstacle since fervent actions taken with emotion might be difficult to let go by its proponents even when facing failure multiple times.	0_1.6.11.2.	Common good is an emotive term - in reality, the intent of design of a supranational treaty will not necessarily correlate with its actual results, and in fact it might be an obstacle since fervent actions taken with emotion might be difficult to let go by its proponents even when facing failure multiple times.	pro	
sovereignty is a real thing, used to create and agree to relationships. all wills (individual or group) are sovereign since it is only that will that can decide if it agreements are honored that were made in the past, present and into the future.	0_1.6.11.3.	Sovereignty is a real thing, used to create and agree to relationships. All wills (individual or group) are sovereign since it is only that will that can decide if it agreements are honored that were made in the past, present and into the future.	pro	
uk's sovereignty may be mitigated as it signs new trade deals, each with its own demands and restrictions.	0_1.6.11.4.	UK's sovereignty may be mitigated as it signs new trade deals, each with its own demands and restrictions.	con	Leaving without a deal will put the UK at a disadvantage in negotiations for new trade relations with other nations. This may mean greater restrictions on our "sovereignty" than those we have within the EU.
leaving without a deal will put the uk at a disadvantage in negotiations for new trade relations with other nations. this may mean greater restrictions on our "sovereignty" than those we have within the eu.	0_1.6.11.4.1.	Leaving without a deal will put the UK at a disadvantage in negotiations for new trade relations with other nations. This may mean greater restrictions on our "sovereignty" than those we have within the EU.	con	
it will allow the uk to improve the nhs.	0_1.7.	It will allow the UK to improve the NHS.	pro	A lot of the jobs that the British people don't want to do in hospitals have to be done by others, usually EU immigrants. By reducing the freedom of movement, the NHS will receive fewer doctors, nurses and surgeons from EU countries who have the qualifications to contribute to our healthcare system.	If the UK does not replicate and effectively enforce the equivalent of EU directives related to health and wellbeing while other standards decline, the NHS will have to spend more money tackling poor health.	Many people with actual working knowledge of the NHS have said unambiguously that we can have Brexit or the NHS, but not both. Usually people claiming a successful outcome have links to private healthcare providers.	The NHS will have more budget.	Brexit has cost a fortune so far, and is set to cost even more, given the number of customs officials and other administration. The NHS is unlikely to survive at all.
a lot of the jobs that the british people don't want to do in hospitals have to be done by others, usually eu immigrants. by reducing the freedom of movement, the nhs will receive fewer doctors, nurses and surgeons from eu countries who have the qualifications to contribute to our healthcare system.	0_1.7.1.	A lot of the jobs that the British people don't want to do in hospitals have to be done by others, usually EU immigrants. By reducing the freedom of movement, the NHS will receive fewer doctors, nurses and surgeons from EU countries who have the qualifications to contribute to our healthcare system.	con	Reducing supply of nurses and doctors from the EU will be an opportunity to train own people into these occupations. By reducing immigration (82% population growth recently caused by immigration) we will also reduce growth of the demand for health service.	Much of any "increased budget" will have to be put towards recruiting and training staff and hiring more expensive agency staff to replace EU workers.	Ending of freedom of movement from EU will allow capacity for skilled immigration from non-EU countries. This could mean more skilled medical staff from non-EU countries, without diminishing number of EU staff.	Freedom of movement enables healthcare professionals to gain experience working in other European countries. The result is a cross-pollination of ideas and skills, resulting in better ways of working. It also facilitates collaboration in medical research projects.
reducing supply of nurses and doctors from the eu will be an opportunity to train own people into these occupations. by reducing immigration (82% population growth recently caused by immigration) we will also reduce growth of the demand for health service.	0_1.7.1.1.	Reducing supply of nurses and doctors from the EU will be an opportunity to train own people into these occupations. By reducing immigration (82% population growth recently caused by immigration) we will also reduce growth of the demand for health service.	pro	
much of any "increased budget" will have to be put towards recruiting and training staff and hiring more expensive agency staff to replace eu workers.	0_1.7.1.2.	Much of any "increased budget" will have to be put towards recruiting and training staff and hiring more expensive agency staff to replace EU workers.	con	Cheaper workers can be hired from further afield than the EU. They won't need training because we can set our immigration rules to only allow qualified immigrants.
cheaper workers can be hired from further afield than the eu. they won't need training because we can set our immigration rules to only allow qualified immigrants.	0_1.7.1.2.1.	Cheaper workers can be hired from further afield than the EU. They won't need training because we can set our immigration rules to only allow qualified immigrants.	pro	
ending of freedom of movement from eu will allow capacity for skilled immigration from non-eu countries. this could mean more skilled medical staff from non-eu countries, without diminishing number of eu staff.	0_1.7.1.3.	Ending of freedom of movement from EU will allow capacity for skilled immigration from non-EU countries. This could mean more skilled medical staff from non-EU countries, without diminishing number of EU staff.	pro	
freedom of movement enables healthcare professionals to gain experience working in other european countries. the result is a cross-pollination of ideas and skills, resulting in better ways of working. it also facilitates collaboration in medical research projects.	0_1.7.1.4.	Freedom of movement enables healthcare professionals to gain experience working in other European countries. The result is a cross-pollination of ideas and skills, resulting in better ways of working. It also facilitates collaboration in medical research projects.	con	
if the uk does not replicate and effectively enforce the equivalent of eu directives related to health and wellbeing while other standards decline, the nhs will have to spend more money tackling poor health.	0_1.7.2.	If the UK does not replicate and effectively enforce the equivalent of EU directives related to health and wellbeing while other standards decline, the NHS will have to spend more money tackling poor health.	con	We will be able to set rules such that "self inflicted" illnesses are not eligible for NHS aid.
we will be able to set rules such that "self inflicted" illnesses are not eligible for nhs aid.	0_1.7.2.1.	We will be able to set rules such that "self inflicted" illnesses are not eligible for NHS aid.	pro	Poor health is often linked to poverty, which nobody chooses to be born into.
poor health is often linked to poverty, which nobody chooses to be born into.	0_1.7.2.1.1.	Poor health is often linked to poverty, which nobody chooses to be born into.	con	
many people with actual working knowledge of the nhs have said unambiguously that we can have brexit or the nhs, but not both. usually people claiming a successful outcome have links to private healthcare providers.	0_1.7.3.	Many people with actual working knowledge of the NHS have said unambiguously that we can have Brexit or the NHS, but not both. Usually people claiming a successful outcome have links to private healthcare providers.	con	Even those with no knowledge of the NHS are working on the basis of Brexit or the NHS.
even those with no knowledge of the nhs are working on the basis of brexit or the nhs.	0_1.7.3.1.	Even those with no knowledge of the NHS are working on the basis of Brexit or the NHS.	con	
the nhs will have more budget.	0_1.7.4.	The NHS will have more budget.	pro	Any increase in NHS spending will have to come from heavier taxation. The Tories are ideologically opposed to that, even though they have pledged to increase NHS spending substantially, it is unlikely to actually happen.	Having more budget is useless without the capacity to mobilise it.	Any economic slow-down due to Brexit would reduce tax receipts for the government, restricting the country's budget and reducing funding for the NHS.	The budget for the NHS could be increased or reduced regardless of our membership of the EU.	The promise of £350M to NHS is just not true.	The UK prime minister has claimed that the NHS budget would increase by £20bn by 2023.	Post Brexit, the UK will be able to pump in £394 million more a week into the National Health Service.
any increase in nhs spending will have to come from heavier taxation. the tories are ideologically opposed to that, even though they have pledged to increase nhs spending substantially, it is unlikely to actually happen.	0_1.7.4.1.	Any increase in NHS spending will have to come from heavier taxation. The Tories are ideologically opposed to that, even though they have pledged to increase NHS spending substantially, it is unlikely to actually happen.	con	
having more budget is useless without the capacity to mobilise it.	0_1.7.4.2.	Having more budget is useless without the capacity to mobilise it.	con	
any economic slow-down due to brexit would reduce tax receipts for the government, restricting the country's budget and reducing funding for the nhs.	0_1.7.4.3.	Any economic slow-down due to Brexit would reduce tax receipts for the government, restricting the country's budget and reducing funding for the NHS.	con	
the budget for the nhs could be increased or reduced regardless of our membership of the eu.	0_1.7.4.4.	The budget for the NHS could be increased or reduced regardless of our membership of the EU.	con	
the promise of £350m to nhs is just not true.	0_1.7.4.5.	The promise of £350M to NHS is just not true.	con	There is no evidence that any saved money (if any even exists) is going toward a budget for the NHS.	Devaluation of the pound is already set to increase costs for the NHS by more than double the entire £350m/week that "could" have gone to the NHS.	While that was a major campaign pledge, Farage & Johnson both quickly backpedalled after 'winning' and said it was not something they could promise.	The famous bus did not claim that £350m would go to the NHS. It said: "We send the EU £350 a week. Let's fund the NHS instead". This conveyed that we could use our EU contributions to increase funding to the NHS and other similar good causes, not that all savings would go directly to the NHS. Remember - it was a slogan written on the side of a bus; there was no room for a detailed, comprehensive spending plan for the £350 million.
there is no evidence that any saved money (if any even exists) is going toward a budget for the nhs.	0_1.7.4.5.1.	There is no evidence that any saved money (if any even exists) is going toward a budget for the NHS.	con	
devaluation of the pound is already set to increase costs for the nhs by more than double the entire £350m/week that "could" have gone to the nhs.	0_1.7.4.5.2.	Devaluation of the pound is already set to increase costs for the NHS by more than double the entire £350m/week that "could" have gone to the NHS.	con	
while that was a major campaign pledge, farage & johnson both quickly backpedalled after 'winning' and said it was not something they could promise.	0_1.7.4.5.3.	While that was a major campaign pledge, Farage & Johnson both quickly backpedalled after 'winning' and said it was not something they could promise.	con	
the famous bus did not claim that £350m would go to the nhs. it said: "we send the eu £350 a week. let's fund the nhs instead". this conveyed that we could use our eu contributions to increase funding to the nhs and other similar good causes, not that all savings would go directly to the nhs. remember - it was a slogan written on the side of a bus; there was no room for a detailed, comprehensive spending plan for the £350 million.	0_1.7.4.5.4.	The famous bus did not claim that £350m would go to the NHS. It said: "We send the EU £350 a week. Let's fund the NHS instead". This conveyed that we could use our EU contributions to increase funding to the NHS and other similar good causes, not that all savings would go directly to the NHS. Remember - it was a slogan written on the side of a bus; there was no room for a detailed, comprehensive spending plan for the £350 million.	pro	The UK does not spend £350 million/week on the EU, so that figure is not available to spend on the NHS, or anywhere else.	Leave campaigners did not begin claiming this statement as merely something they "could" do until after the referendum result was announced. Had they done so before they may well have lost.
the uk does not spend £350 million/week on the eu, so that figure is not available to spend on the nhs, or anywhere else.	0_1.7.4.5.4.1.	The UK does not spend £350 million/week on the EU, so that figure is not available to spend on the NHS, or anywhere else.	con	
leave campaigners did not begin claiming this statement as merely something they "could" do until after the referendum result was announced. had they done so before they may well have lost.	0_1.7.4.5.4.2.	Leave campaigners did not begin claiming this statement as merely something they "could" do until after the referendum result was announced. Had they done so before they may well have lost.	con	
the uk prime minister has claimed that the nhs budget would increase by £20bn by 2023.	0_1.7.4.6.	The UK prime minister has claimed that the NHS budget would increase by £20bn by 2023.	pro	
post brexit, the uk will be able to pump in £394 million more a week into the national health service.	0_1.7.4.7.	Post Brexit, the UK will be able to pump in £394 million more a week into the National Health Service.	pro	
brexit has cost a fortune so far, and is set to cost even more, given the number of customs officials and other administration. the nhs is unlikely to survive at all.	0_1.7.5.	Brexit has cost a fortune so far, and is set to cost even more, given the number of customs officials and other administration. The NHS is unlikely to survive at all.	con	
the uk has faced political and parliamentary divisions as a result of brexit.	0_1.9.	The UK has faced political and parliamentary divisions as a result of Brexit.	con	Brexit has uncovered deep seated divisions in and across the country and between the people and Parliament. The fears, hatred and xenophobia generated by some campaign leaders and the media will not quietly go away and leave Britain a united community.
brexit has uncovered deep seated divisions in and across the country and between the people and parliament. the fears, hatred and xenophobia generated by some campaign leaders and the media will not quietly go away and leave britain a united community.	0_1.9.1.	Brexit has uncovered deep seated divisions in and across the country and between the people and Parliament. The fears, hatred and xenophobia generated by some campaign leaders and the media will not quietly go away and leave Britain a united community.	con	It is better that these divisions are out in the open where they can be dealt with, especially in respect of the division between parliament and the people. If that one is dealt with, then the other divisions will very likely be substantially diminished.
it is better that these divisions are out in the open where they can be dealt with, especially in respect of the division between parliament and the people. if that one is dealt with, then the other divisions will very likely be substantially diminished.	0_1.9.1.1.	It is better that these divisions are out in the open where they can be dealt with, especially in respect of the division between parliament and the people. If that one is dealt with, then the other divisions will very likely be substantially diminished.	pro	It would be better still if the activities generating fear, hatred and xenophobia were out in the open so they could be dealt with.
it would be better still if the activities generating fear, hatred and xenophobia were out in the open so they could be dealt with.	0_1.9.1.1.1.	It would be better still if the activities generating fear, hatred and xenophobia were out in the open so they could be dealt with.	con	
the uk should remain in the eu if a hard brexit is the only alternative option.	1_1.	The UK should remain in the EU if a hard Brexit is the only alternative option.	con	A hard Brexit would end Freedom of Movement, and all the associated benefits it brings.	A hard Brexit would threaten the UK's domestic security with respect to crime, terrorism and the rule of law.	Being part of the EU harms British culture.	The EU is too dysfunctional for the UK.	A hard Brexit will hurt the scientific community in the UK.	The UK should be able to control and limit its immigration policy as it sees fit.	A hard Brexit will negatively affect the National Health Service.	The supremacy of EU law impinges on Britain's ability to make laws to govern itself; by exiting the EU, Britain can make rules on any area it chooses.	The UK leaving the EU harms the EU and wider Europe.	A hard Brexit will significantly damage the UK economy.	The institutions of the EU are not representative of modern Britain.	By remaining in the EU, the UK would be able to operate broadly as before but with clear caveats regarding some issues that concern its citizens.	Remaining in the EU would exacerbate political instability.	Britain will have significantly less influence in Europe if it leaves the EU, and as a result will be a weaker nation in the international community.
a hard brexit would end freedom of movement, and all the associated benefits it brings.	1_1.1.	A hard Brexit would end Freedom of Movement, and all the associated benefits it brings.	con	Without a deal or other residency rights, the entitlement of UK nationals to reside elsewhere in the EU could technically disappear overnight.	Brits don't particularly want to live in the EU. None of the top 3 countries that Brits emigrate to are in the EU (Australia, US, and Canada).	Many students studying in the UK will have less exposure to employers outside of the UK, as well as lower opportunities for studying abroad.	The right to move and work throughout Europe could still be granted through a standard visa process.
without a deal or other residency rights, the entitlement of uk nationals to reside elsewhere in the eu could technically disappear overnight.	1_1.1.1.	Without a deal or other residency rights, the entitlement of UK nationals to reside elsewhere in the EU could technically disappear overnight.	con	If both the UK and individual EU states value the relationship they currently have with each other, they can form bilateral agreements to preserve the conditions required to ensure ease of travel, work and education.	Spain, which has by far the largest number of UK citizens, has bilaterally agreed citizens rights with the UK.	A hard Brexit would also harm the ability of Britons to settle in the EU in the future.	British tourists looking to travel Europe would most likely need visas and security screenings. This makes travel more costly and more difficult.
if both the uk and individual eu states value the relationship they currently have with each other, they can form bilateral agreements to preserve the conditions required to ensure ease of travel, work and education.	1_1.1.1.1.	If both the UK and individual EU states value the relationship they currently have with each other, they can form bilateral agreements to preserve the conditions required to ensure ease of travel, work and education.	pro	For individual EU countries to grant the UK the same full open borders as before, the UK would have to reciprocate by opening their own borders too. This is not politically supportable for the UK, as closing down immigration was a major goal of Brexit - there won't be public desire or the political mandate to start re-opening borders.	An increasing number of EU countries (most recently Portugal have made unilateral pledges to maintain visa free travel post-Brexit. The countries most likely to carry on this trend are the countries which benefit a great deal from UK tourism; i.e. the countries UK citizens would be most concerned about unrestricted travel to.	The UK can make bilateral arrangements to retain rights as it sees fit. For example, Switzerland and the UK have reached a bilateral agreement that retains trade and residency rights, and the UK and Spain have made similar bilateral arrangements,	Spain has guaranteed British citizens can continue to live there even in the event of a no-deal Brexit.
for individual eu countries to grant the uk the same full open borders as before, the uk would have to reciprocate by opening their own borders too. this is not politically supportable for the uk, as closing down immigration was a major goal of brexit - there won't be public desire or the political mandate to start re-opening borders.	1_1.1.1.1.1.	For individual EU countries to grant the UK the same full open borders as before, the UK would have to reciprocate by opening their own borders too. This is not politically supportable for the UK, as closing down immigration was a major goal of Brexit - there won't be public desire or the political mandate to start re-opening borders.	con	Public support may exist to open borders with countries more ethnically close to us, like France and Germany, but keep eastern Europeans out.
public support may exist to open borders with countries more ethnically close to us, like france and germany, but keep eastern europeans out.	1_1.1.1.1.1.1.	Public support may exist to open borders with countries more ethnically close to us, like France and Germany, but keep eastern Europeans out.	pro	
an increasing number of eu countries (most recently portugal have made unilateral pledges to maintain visa free travel post-brexit. the countries most likely to carry on this trend are the countries which benefit a great deal from uk tourism; i.e. the countries uk citizens would be most concerned about unrestricted travel to.	1_1.1.1.1.2.	An increasing number of EU countries (most recently Portugal have made unilateral pledges to maintain visa free travel post-Brexit. The countries most likely to carry on this trend are the countries which benefit a great deal from UK tourism; i.e. the countries UK citizens would be most concerned about unrestricted travel to.	pro	
the uk can make bilateral arrangements to retain rights as it sees fit. for example, switzerland and the uk have reached a bilateral agreement that retains trade and residency rights, and the uk and spain have made similar bilateral arrangements,	1_1.1.1.1.3.	The UK can make bilateral arrangements to retain rights as it sees fit. For example, Switzerland and the UK have reached a bilateral agreement that retains trade and residency rights, and the UK and Spain have made similar bilateral arrangements,	pro	
spain has guaranteed british citizens can continue to live there even in the event of a no-deal brexit.	1_1.1.1.1.4.	Spain has guaranteed British citizens can continue to live there even in the event of a no-deal Brexit.	pro	Spain is only one of the roughly 27 other member states of the EU. Most other EU states will require visas from British people and have to comply with that EU legislation. Free movement is for EU people only and if the UK leaves they will forfeit that right for the majority of member states.
spain is only one of the roughly 27 other member states of the eu. most other eu states will require visas from british people and have to comply with that eu legislation. free movement is for eu people only and if the uk leaves they will forfeit that right for the majority of member states.	1_1.1.1.1.4.1.	Spain is only one of the roughly 27 other member states of the EU. Most other EU states will require visas from British people and have to comply with that EU legislation. Free movement is for EU people only and if the UK leaves they will forfeit that right for the majority of member states.	con	
spain, which has by far the largest number of uk citizens, has bilaterally agreed citizens rights with the uk.	1_1.1.1.2.	Spain, which has by far the largest number of UK citizens, has bilaterally agreed citizens rights with the UK.	pro	
a hard brexit would also harm the ability of britons to settle in the eu in the future.	1_1.1.1.3.	A hard Brexit would also harm the ability of Britons to settle in the EU in the future.	con	
british tourists looking to travel europe would most likely need visas and security screenings. this makes travel more costly and more difficult.	1_1.1.1.4.	British tourists looking to travel Europe would most likely need visas and security screenings. This makes travel more costly and more difficult.	con	Those visiting the UK from the EU would also have to obtain visas, making it easier to keep an accurate account of who is legally in the UK.	British people spending money abroad through tourism is money leaving the British economy. It is better to have them vacation domestically.	It is likely that the visa scheme will resemble the U.S. process which guarantees 90 days upon entry. While this is more difficult than the status quo, millions of tourists still travel from Britain to the U.S. each year.
those visiting the uk from the eu would also have to obtain visas, making it easier to keep an accurate account of who is legally in the uk.	1_1.1.1.4.1.	Those visiting the UK from the EU would also have to obtain visas, making it easier to keep an accurate account of who is legally in the UK.	pro	While that may be positive for immigration, it could have a negative impact on the tourism industry in the UK.
while that may be positive for immigration, it could have a negative impact on the tourism industry in the uk.	1_1.1.1.4.1.1.	While that may be positive for immigration, it could have a negative impact on the tourism industry in the UK.	con	Tourism in the UK generates 9% of the country's GDP and nearly 10% of jobs. A decline in tourists due to Brexit would damage the UK economy.	Currently, the UK's airline routes to EU and US destinations are arranged through EU agreements; a hard Brexit could call these into question.	The additional work of procuring a visa may deter people from using the UK as a holiday destination.
tourism in the uk generates 9% of the country's gdp and nearly 10% of jobs. a decline in tourists due to brexit would damage the uk economy.	1_1.1.1.4.1.1.1.	Tourism in the UK generates 9% of the country's GDP and nearly 10% of jobs. A decline in tourists due to Brexit would damage the UK economy.	con	
currently, the uk's airline routes to eu and us destinations are arranged through eu agreements; a hard brexit could call these into question.	1_1.1.1.4.1.1.2.	Currently, the UK's airline routes to EU and US destinations are arranged through EU agreements; a hard Brexit could call these into question.	con	As an island nation, transport links are highly important.	The aviation sector does not have the emergency fall-back option of World Trade Organisation rules which apply to most sectors. As a result, Brexit could severely reduce the number of routes for holidaymakers, business travellers and visitors to the UK.
as an island nation, transport links are highly important.	1_1.1.1.4.1.1.2.1.	As an island nation, transport links are highly important.	con	
the aviation sector does not have the emergency fall-back option of world trade organisation rules which apply to most sectors. as a result, brexit could severely reduce the number of routes for holidaymakers, business travellers and visitors to the uk.	1_1.1.1.4.1.1.2.2.	The aviation sector does not have the emergency fall-back option of World Trade Organisation rules which apply to most sectors. As a result, Brexit could severely reduce the number of routes for holidaymakers, business travellers and visitors to the UK.	con	
the additional work of procuring a visa may deter people from using the uk as a holiday destination.	1_1.1.1.4.1.1.3.	The additional work of procuring a visa may deter people from using the UK as a holiday destination.	con	
british people spending money abroad through tourism is money leaving the british economy. it is better to have them vacation domestically.	1_1.1.1.4.2.	British people spending money abroad through tourism is money leaving the British economy. It is better to have them vacation domestically.	pro	
it is likely that the visa scheme will resemble the u.s. process which guarantees 90 days upon entry. while this is more difficult than the status quo, millions of tourists still travel from britain to the u.s. each year.	1_1.1.1.4.3.	It is likely that the visa scheme will resemble the U.S. process which guarantees 90 days upon entry. While this is more difficult than the status quo, millions of tourists still travel from Britain to the U.S. each year.	pro	
brits don't particularly want to live in the eu. none of the top 3 countries that brits emigrate to are in the eu (australia, us, and canada).	1_1.1.2.	Brits don't particularly want to live in the EU. None of the top 3 countries that Brits emigrate to are in the EU (Australia, US, and Canada).	pro	1.3 million people born in the UK live in other EU countries, according to 2017 estimates from the United Nations (UN).	This may partly be because the most popular holidays destinations are in the EU, and people emigrating want to take the chance to live and work somewhere new that they couldn't visit easily otherwise.	Around 900,000 UK citizens are long-term residents of other EU countries (ONS, 2010 2011.	Freedom of Movement is not the same as Immigration. By definition it is the ability to move about and work anywhere within the EU.
1.3 million people born in the uk live in other eu countries, according to 2017 estimates from the united nations (un).	1_1.1.2.1.	1.3 million people born in the UK live in other EU countries, according to 2017 estimates from the United Nations (UN).	con	This is still less than the number of Brits living in Australia alone and reinforces rather than negates the parent claim. Given the EU27 comprises 27 countries, 450 million people and 15% of global GDP, while Australia had a population and GDP about one 20th the size, this illustrates the vast preference of Brits to live in non-EU countries, which preference is greatly increased even further when retirees are discounted.
this is still less than the number of brits living in australia alone and reinforces rather than negates the parent claim. given the eu27 comprises 27 countries, 450 million people and 15% of global gdp, while australia had a population and gdp about one 20th the size, this illustrates the vast preference of brits to live in non-eu countries, which preference is greatly increased even further when retirees are discounted.	1_1.1.2.1.1.	This is still less than the number of Brits living in Australia alone and reinforces rather than negates the parent claim. Given the EU27 comprises 27 countries, 450 million people and 15% of global GDP, while Australia had a population and GDP about one 20th the size, this illustrates the vast preference of Brits to live in non-EU countries, which preference is greatly increased even further when retirees are discounted.	pro	
this may partly be because the most popular holidays destinations are in the eu, and people emigrating want to take the chance to live and work somewhere new that they couldn't visit easily otherwise.	1_1.1.2.2.	This may partly be because the most popular holidays destinations are in the EU, and people emigrating want to take the chance to live and work somewhere new that they couldn't visit easily otherwise.	con	The qualities one looks for in a holiday destination are different to those one looks for in a place to settle permanently. That people are familiar with the EU but don't want to live there suggests simply that they don't want to live there. Language and cultural barriers are far more likely reasons for Brits choosing not to live in the EU, with the exception of retirees - who are a special case of immigrant living a lifestyle more similar to that of a holidaymaker.	Given EU countries represent the closest and cheapest travel destinations, this statistic is hardly surprising.	America is very popular as a tourist destination (no. 5) but more than twice as popular for migration as the most popular EU migration destination (Spain).
the qualities one looks for in a holiday destination are different to those one looks for in a place to settle permanently. that people are familiar with the eu but don't want to live there suggests simply that they don't want to live there. language and cultural barriers are far more likely reasons for brits choosing not to live in the eu, with the exception of retirees - who are a special case of immigrant living a lifestyle more similar to that of a holidaymaker.	1_1.1.2.2.1.	The qualities one looks for in a holiday destination are different to those one looks for in a place to settle permanently. That people are familiar with the EU but don't want to live there suggests simply that they don't want to live there. Language and cultural barriers are far more likely reasons for Brits choosing not to live in the EU, with the exception of retirees - who are a special case of immigrant living a lifestyle more similar to that of a holidaymaker.	pro	
given eu countries represent the closest and cheapest travel destinations, this statistic is hardly surprising.	1_1.1.2.2.2.	Given EU countries represent the closest and cheapest travel destinations, this statistic is hardly surprising.	pro	
america is very popular as a tourist destination (no. 5) but more than twice as popular for migration as the most popular eu migration destination (spain).	1_1.1.2.2.3.	America is very popular as a tourist destination (no. 5) but more than twice as popular for migration as the most popular EU migration destination (Spain).	pro	
around 900,000 uk citizens are long-term residents of other eu countries (ons, 2010 2011.	1_1.1.2.3.	Around 900,000 UK citizens are long-term residents of other EU countries (ONS, 2010 2011.	con	Over 250k of these are pensioners, who are effectively on a semi-permanent holiday.  Therefore the number of UK citizens working in the EU is at most just 650k.	This is a relatively small number considering there are over 1.3 million British residents in Australia alone.	These are not distributed evenly across the EU, and therefore the UK would be better served by dealing with popular destinations on a bilateral basis.
over 250k of these are pensioners, who are effectively on a semi-permanent holiday.  therefore the number of uk citizens working in the eu is at most just 650k.	1_1.1.2.3.1.	Over 250k of these are pensioners, who are effectively on a semi-permanent holiday.  Therefore the number of UK citizens working in the EU is at most just 650k.	pro	
this is a relatively small number considering there are over 1.3 million british residents in australia alone.	1_1.1.2.3.2.	This is a relatively small number considering there are over 1.3 million British residents in Australia alone.	pro	
these are not distributed evenly across the eu, and therefore the uk would be better served by dealing with popular destinations on a bilateral basis.	1_1.1.2.3.3.	These are not distributed evenly across the EU, and therefore the UK would be better served by dealing with popular destinations on a bilateral basis.	pro	You can’t negotiate that with part of the EU with any real success, especially in the Schengen zone. You may want to read the basis of negotiations in this briefing. researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk
you can’t negotiate that with part of the eu with any real success, especially in the schengen zone. you may want to read the basis of negotiations in this briefing. researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk	1_1.1.2.3.3.1.	You can’t negotiate that with part of the EU with any real success, especially in the Schengen zone. You may want to read the basis of negotiations in this briefing. researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk	con	
freedom of movement is not the same as immigration. by definition it is the ability to move about and work anywhere within the eu.	1_1.1.2.4.	Freedom of Movement is not the same as Immigration. By definition it is the ability to move about and work anywhere within the EU.	con	
many students studying in the uk will have less exposure to employers outside of the uk, as well as lower opportunities for studying abroad.	1_1.1.3.	Many students studying in the UK will have less exposure to employers outside of the UK, as well as lower opportunities for studying abroad.	con	If there are fewer EU people working in the UK, then there may be more opportunities for students studying there to get a job in the UK.
if there are fewer eu people working in the uk, then there may be more opportunities for students studying there to get a job in the uk.	1_1.1.3.1.	If there are fewer EU people working in the UK, then there may be more opportunities for students studying there to get a job in the UK.	pro	
the right to move and work throughout europe could still be granted through a standard visa process.	1_1.1.4.	The right to move and work throughout Europe could still be granted through a standard visa process.	pro	
a hard brexit would threaten the uk's domestic security with respect to crime, terrorism and the rule of law.	1_1.2.	A hard Brexit would threaten the UK's domestic security with respect to crime, terrorism and the rule of law.	con	The European Arrest Warrants, which rely on the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union, have reduced the time taken to extradite criminals from 1 year to just 48 days.	In 2016, UK agencies launched 3,000 investigations at Europol (the EU's law enforcement agency into cross-border organised crime and terrorism.	A hard Brexit would be particularly dangerous as it might threaten access to some essential systems such as the Second Generation Schengen Information System, which is a key tool in countering terrorism.
the european arrest warrants, which rely on the jurisdiction of the court of justice of the european union, have reduced the time taken to extradite criminals from 1 year to just 48 days.	1_1.2.1.	The European Arrest Warrants, which rely on the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union, have reduced the time taken to extradite criminals from 1 year to just 48 days.	con	Refusing to sign an extradition treaty with the UK to effectively preserve the present system would be an example of the EU acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens. It is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	While there are some theoretical alternatives to European Arrest Warrants which could be as efficient, these have not been successfully implemented despite years of negotiation.	This arrangement need not be dependent on the wide-scale political and economic union that the EU entails. Britain could leave the EU in its totality and then make a bilateral agreement with the EU, which closely resembles the current arrangement. It would be mutually beneficial for the EU and UK to make such an agreement.
refusing to sign an extradition treaty with the uk to effectively preserve the present system would be an example of the eu acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens. it is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	1_1.2.1.1.	Refusing to sign an extradition treaty with the UK to effectively preserve the present system would be an example of the EU acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens. It is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	pro	
while there are some theoretical alternatives to european arrest warrants which could be as efficient, these have not been successfully implemented despite years of negotiation.	1_1.2.1.2.	While there are some theoretical alternatives to European Arrest Warrants which could be as efficient, these have not been successfully implemented despite years of negotiation.	con	
this arrangement need not be dependent on the wide-scale political and economic union that the eu entails. britain could leave the eu in its totality and then make a bilateral agreement with the eu, which closely resembles the current arrangement. it would be mutually beneficial for the eu and uk to make such an agreement.	1_1.2.1.3.	This arrangement need not be dependent on the wide-scale political and economic union that the EU entails. Britain could leave the EU in its totality and then make a bilateral agreement with the EU, which closely resembles the current arrangement. It would be mutually beneficial for the EU and UK to make such an agreement.	pro	
in 2016, uk agencies launched 3,000 investigations at europol (the eu's law enforcement agency into cross-border organised crime and terrorism.	1_1.2.2.	In 2016, UK agencies launched 3,000 investigations at Europol (the EU's law enforcement agency into cross-border organised crime and terrorism.	con	Refusing to allow Europol to work with the UK would be an example of the EU acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens. It is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	Europol is not crucial in combating terrorism as Intelligence Agencies rarely share this kind of sensitive information via this avenue.
refusing to allow europol to work with the uk would be an example of the eu acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens. it is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	1_1.2.2.1.	Refusing to allow Europol to work with the UK would be an example of the EU acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens. It is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	pro	
europol is not crucial in combating terrorism as intelligence agencies rarely share this kind of sensitive information via this avenue.	1_1.2.2.2.	Europol is not crucial in combating terrorism as Intelligence Agencies rarely share this kind of sensitive information via this avenue.	pro	
a hard brexit would be particularly dangerous as it might threaten access to some essential systems such as the second generation schengen information system, which is a key tool in countering terrorism.	1_1.2.3.	A hard Brexit would be particularly dangerous as it might threaten access to some essential systems such as the Second Generation Schengen Information System, which is a key tool in countering terrorism.	con	Losing access would be an example of the EU acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens.  It is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	This system is accessible to individual police officers on the street, and allowed them to identify over 6,000 people of interest (missing, organised crime, etc.) in the UK between April 2015 and March 2016.	Counter terrorism alerts, which are more discrete than the regular police ones, can also be entered into the system.	This system holds the details of over 8,000 suspected members of ISIS, making it invaluable when it comes to tracking returning foreign fighters.	The article quoted says Britain would be unlikely to lose access to these systems: "But shutting Britain out of this club would be counter-productive for the rest of Europe, so officers are confident it will be retained after Brexit."
losing access would be an example of the eu acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens.  it is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	1_1.2.3.1.	Losing access would be an example of the EU acting maliciously against the interests of its own citizens.  It is right to leave a club as nasty as to endanger lives of its own people rather than compromise with a close ally.	pro	Many aspects of EU counter-terrorism is subject to EU law governed by the ECJ. It would simply be illegal under current EU laws to share information covered by data protection with 3rd nations. Brexit was a vote to become a 3rd nation not subject by EU laws, thus we have voted to exclude ourselves from the sharing of counter-terrorism information.	Revoking access to the benefits of the EU is important to maintain the EU's own collective integrity. An 'exclusive' club that grants all of its benefits to non-members would quickly lose many of its members. Therefore the EU's revocation of the UK's access is simply pragmatic, rather than ''nasty''.
many aspects of eu counter-terrorism is subject to eu law governed by the ecj. it would simply be illegal under current eu laws to share information covered by data protection with 3rd nations. brexit was a vote to become a 3rd nation not subject by eu laws, thus we have voted to exclude ourselves from the sharing of counter-terrorism information.	1_1.2.3.1.1.	Many aspects of EU counter-terrorism is subject to EU law governed by the ECJ. It would simply be illegal under current EU laws to share information covered by data protection with 3rd nations. Brexit was a vote to become a 3rd nation not subject by EU laws, thus we have voted to exclude ourselves from the sharing of counter-terrorism information.	con	
revoking access to the benefits of the eu is important to maintain the eu's own collective integrity. an 'exclusive' club that grants all of its benefits to non-members would quickly lose many of its members. therefore the eu's revocation of the uk's access is simply pragmatic, rather than ''nasty''.	1_1.2.3.1.2.	Revoking access to the benefits of the EU is important to maintain the EU's own collective integrity. An 'exclusive' club that grants all of its benefits to non-members would quickly lose many of its members. Therefore the EU's revocation of the UK's access is simply pragmatic, rather than ''nasty''.	con	The EU's tough stance when dealing with Brexit has led to decreased demand for similar exits from other countries.
the eu's tough stance when dealing with brexit has led to decreased demand for similar exits from other countries.	1_1.2.3.1.2.1.	The EU's tough stance when dealing with Brexit has led to decreased demand for similar exits from other countries.	con	
this system is accessible to individual police officers on the street, and allowed them to identify over 6,000 people of interest (missing, organised crime, etc.) in the uk between april 2015 and march 2016.	1_1.2.3.2.	This system is accessible to individual police officers on the street, and allowed them to identify over 6,000 people of interest (missing, organised crime, etc.) in the UK between April 2015 and March 2016.	con	
counter terrorism alerts, which are more discrete than the regular police ones, can also be entered into the system.	1_1.2.3.3.	Counter terrorism alerts, which are more discrete than the regular police ones, can also be entered into the system.	con	
this system holds the details of over 8,000 suspected members of isis, making it invaluable when it comes to tracking returning foreign fighters.	1_1.2.3.4.	This system holds the details of over 8,000 suspected members of ISIS, making it invaluable when it comes to tracking returning foreign fighters.	con	
the article quoted says britain would be unlikely to lose access to these systems: "but shutting britain out of this club would be counter-productive for the rest of europe, so officers are confident it will be retained after brexit."	1_1.2.3.5.	The article quoted says Britain would be unlikely to lose access to these systems: "But shutting Britain out of this club would be counter-productive for the rest of Europe, so officers are confident it will be retained after Brexit."	pro	
being part of the eu harms british culture.	1_1.3.	Being part of the EU harms British culture.	pro	The EU projects its own symbols of a shared identity, for example an anthem and a flag. These cultural symbols distract from more local and national symbols of culture.	"British culture", through history, has been defined by its inclusivity, welcoming nature and acceptance of other cultures. Brexit seeks to alter British culture as opposed to Remain, which enshrines it.	The greatest effect on 'British culture' would likely occur in high immigration areas. However, populations in high immigration areas voted overwhelmingly to stay. This suggests that people genuinely affected by changes in British culture are supportive of this change and that British culture has improved.	EU membership confers benefits and privileges that help preserve British culture.	British culture is primarily influenced by America, even as a member of the EU. Many Leave voters take no issue with American influence but protest cultural influence of other regions.	While immigration is not a problem in itself, if it is too large, and too fast, the people coming in cannot be assimilated to the country’s culture. Thus, communities form that live apart from British culture and do not assimilate or identify with it. It harms British culture, and weakens social cohesion indeed.
the eu projects its own symbols of a shared identity, for example an anthem and a flag. these cultural symbols distract from more local and national symbols of culture.	1_1.3.1.	The EU projects its own symbols of a shared identity, for example an anthem and a flag. These cultural symbols distract from more local and national symbols of culture.	pro	The UK contains five national identities, each with their own flag, and even some counties within England, such as Lancashire, have their own flag. If someone can consider themselves to be from Lancashire, England, and the United Kingdom, it should not be difficult to also identify as European.	The EU indeed has its own flag and anthem to create a shared feeling of being European. This was deliberate to end wars between European states. The EU has been mostly successful in this, but this doesn't override the national flags or anthems.
the uk contains five national identities, each with their own flag, and even some counties within england, such as lancashire, have their own flag. if someone can consider themselves to be from lancashire, england, and the united kingdom, it should not be difficult to also identify as european.	1_1.3.1.1.	The UK contains five national identities, each with their own flag, and even some counties within England, such as Lancashire, have their own flag. If someone can consider themselves to be from Lancashire, England, and the United Kingdom, it should not be difficult to also identify as European.	con	It is not a question of difficulty, but of reality. 50% of British people felt they were British to the exclusion of being European (Standard Eurobarometer, p.30, and therefore feel that European identity and symbols do not represent them.
it is not a question of difficulty, but of reality. 50% of british people felt they were british to the exclusion of being european (standard eurobarometer, p.30, and therefore feel that european identity and symbols do not represent them.	1_1.3.1.1.1.	It is not a question of difficulty, but of reality. 50% of British people felt they were British to the exclusion of being European (Standard Eurobarometer, p.30, and therefore feel that European identity and symbols do not represent them.	pro	And yet, in the same study 58% reported considered themselves to be a citizen of the EU.
and yet, in the same study 58% reported considered themselves to be a citizen of the eu.	1_1.3.1.1.1.1.	And yet, in the same study 58% reported considered themselves to be a citizen of the EU.	con	
the eu indeed has its own flag and anthem to create a shared feeling of being european. this was deliberate to end wars between european states. the eu has been mostly successful in this, but this doesn't override the national flags or anthems.	1_1.3.1.2.	The EU indeed has its own flag and anthem to create a shared feeling of being European. This was deliberate to end wars between European states. The EU has been mostly successful in this, but this doesn't override the national flags or anthems.	con	
"british culture", through history, has been defined by its inclusivity, welcoming nature and acceptance of other cultures. brexit seeks to alter british culture as opposed to remain, which enshrines it.	1_1.3.2.	"British culture", through history, has been defined by its inclusivity, welcoming nature and acceptance of other cultures. Brexit seeks to alter British culture as opposed to Remain, which enshrines it.	con	British culture is itself an amalgamation of different cultures, including from many EU countries.	Britain has historically been ruthless and discriminatory against the cultures of the people it has colonized.	Britain has internalized many of the cultural practises of the nations of the Commonwealth. For example, Indian food is now present and readily available throughout Britain.
british culture is itself an amalgamation of different cultures, including from many eu countries.	1_1.3.2.1.	British culture is itself an amalgamation of different cultures, including from many EU countries.	con	Being European is a big part of British culture. British art, food, sports and religions are primarily derived from thousands of years of shared history with other European countries and peoples.	British people and their culture are fundamentally European. The Anglo-Saxons and even the Celts arrived here from Europe. Before the Celts, Britain was populated by Basques who arrived from France and Spain. Old English originates from North Sea Germanic, and Modern English developed through combining Old English with Norse, French, Latin, and Greek.	British identity, although having indeed been influenced by various cultures over the course of history, is still a unique country, with a specific culture and identity, that cannot be reduced to an amalgamation of different cultures (which, in the end, could be considered true of all cultures). After all, it is obvious from a glance, and even more if we dig deeper, that the UK is very different from France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Hungary, etc.
being european is a big part of british culture. british art, food, sports and religions are primarily derived from thousands of years of shared history with other european countries and peoples.	1_1.3.2.1.1.	Being European is a big part of British culture. British art, food, sports and religions are primarily derived from thousands of years of shared history with other European countries and peoples.	con	
british people and their culture are fundamentally european. the anglo-saxons and even the celts arrived here from europe. before the celts, britain was populated by basques who arrived from france and spain. old english originates from north sea germanic, and modern english developed through combining old english with norse, french, latin, and greek.	1_1.3.2.1.2.	British people and their culture are fundamentally European. The Anglo-Saxons and even the Celts arrived here from Europe. Before the Celts, Britain was populated by Basques who arrived from France and Spain. Old English originates from North Sea Germanic, and Modern English developed through combining Old English with Norse, French, Latin, and Greek.	con	
british identity, although having indeed been influenced by various cultures over the course of history, is still a unique country, with a specific culture and identity, that cannot be reduced to an amalgamation of different cultures (which, in the end, could be considered true of all cultures). after all, it is obvious from a glance, and even more if we dig deeper, that the uk is very different from france, germany, italy, poland, hungary, etc.	1_1.3.2.1.3.	British identity, although having indeed been influenced by various cultures over the course of history, is still a unique country, with a specific culture and identity, that cannot be reduced to an amalgamation of different cultures (which, in the end, could be considered true of all cultures). After all, it is obvious from a glance, and even more if we dig deeper, that the UK is very different from France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Hungary, etc.	pro	The UK is in fact a collection of countries (and a country fragment) each with its own distinct culture. They borrow from one other, and from their European neighbours.	Italians are different from French (remember Napoleon?), Polish are different from Germans (remember WW2?). And yet, French, Italians, English, Polish and Germans share common values: human rights, no death row, freedom of speech, public services, democracy (to mention a few). The English are different, yes, but not more different than other European nations between them. And at the same time have much more in common compared to other cultures.
the uk is in fact a collection of countries (and a country fragment) each with its own distinct culture. they borrow from one other, and from their european neighbours.	1_1.3.2.1.3.1.	The UK is in fact a collection of countries (and a country fragment) each with its own distinct culture. They borrow from one other, and from their European neighbours.	con	
italians are different from french (remember napoleon?), polish are different from germans (remember ww2?). and yet, french, italians, english, polish and germans share common values: human rights, no death row, freedom of speech, public services, democracy (to mention a few). the english are different, yes, but not more different than other european nations between them. and at the same time have much more in common compared to other cultures.	1_1.3.2.1.3.2.	Italians are different from French (remember Napoleon?), Polish are different from Germans (remember WW2?). And yet, French, Italians, English, Polish and Germans share common values: human rights, no death row, freedom of speech, public services, democracy (to mention a few). The English are different, yes, but not more different than other European nations between them. And at the same time have much more in common compared to other cultures.	con	
britain has historically been ruthless and discriminatory against the cultures of the people it has colonized.	1_1.3.2.2.	Britain has historically been ruthless and discriminatory against the cultures of the people it has colonized.	pro	Colonial bad behaviour against others' cultures has occurred in the colonies, but that does not establish that the same has occurred in Britain.
colonial bad behaviour against others' cultures has occurred in the colonies, but that does not establish that the same has occurred in britain.	1_1.3.2.2.1.	Colonial bad behaviour against others' cultures has occurred in the colonies, but that does not establish that the same has occurred in Britain.	con	
britain has internalized many of the cultural practises of the nations of the commonwealth. for example, indian food is now present and readily available throughout britain.	1_1.3.2.3.	Britain has internalized many of the cultural practises of the nations of the Commonwealth. For example, Indian food is now present and readily available throughout Britain.	con	
the greatest effect on 'british culture' would likely occur in high immigration areas. however, populations in high immigration areas voted overwhelmingly to stay. this suggests that people genuinely affected by changes in british culture are supportive of this change and that british culture has improved.	1_1.3.3.	The greatest effect on 'British culture' would likely occur in high immigration areas. However, populations in high immigration areas voted overwhelmingly to stay. This suggests that people genuinely affected by changes in British culture are supportive of this change and that British culture has improved.	con	If you look at changes in immigration levels a different pattern emerges. Recent changes in the proportion of immigrants (even though to smaller absolute numbers) correlated strongly with voting leave.	From this it appears that any negative consequences for culture and national unity are not so much experienced by people who have the most experience with immigrants, but could be just a perception of those without much experience with immigrants.	Most migrants and BME voters voted for remain — the obvious consequence is that, in high immigration areas, the remain vote was stronger. It has nothing to do with experience of immigration/immigrants. This argument would only be relevant and true if migrants from the last 50 years had not voted.	Even if this were true, it would not be surprising that people who have not yet been negatively affected by immigration would be apprehensive of those effects reaching them — as them not living in high immigration areas does not mean they cannot know how immigration affects their country.
if you look at changes in immigration levels a different pattern emerges. recent changes in the proportion of immigrants (even though to smaller absolute numbers) correlated strongly with voting leave.	1_1.3.3.1.	If you look at changes in immigration levels a different pattern emerges. Recent changes in the proportion of immigrants (even though to smaller absolute numbers) correlated strongly with voting leave.	pro	This shift may mean that the areas that voted leave were less equiped to adjust to immigration, thus they were acting off real experience.	This does not necessarily disprove the parents claim that "perception of migrants has more effect than experience", instead it shows that people do not like change.
this shift may mean that the areas that voted leave were less equiped to adjust to immigration, thus they were acting off real experience.	1_1.3.3.1.1.	This shift may mean that the areas that voted leave were less equiped to adjust to immigration, thus they were acting off real experience.	pro	
this does not necessarily disprove the parents claim that "perception of migrants has more effect than experience", instead it shows that people do not like change.	1_1.3.3.1.2.	This does not necessarily disprove the parents claim that "perception of migrants has more effect than experience", instead it shows that people do not like change.	con	It could be suggested that if the rate of migration in a town like Boston slowed drastically, the town would get used to the new migrants and opinions would move towards that of the other high total immigration areas (leaning towards remain).
it could be suggested that if the rate of migration in a town like boston slowed drastically, the town would get used to the new migrants and opinions would move towards that of the other high total immigration areas (leaning towards remain).	1_1.3.3.1.2.1.	It could be suggested that if the rate of migration in a town like Boston slowed drastically, the town would get used to the new migrants and opinions would move towards that of the other high total immigration areas (leaning towards remain).	con	
from this it appears that any negative consequences for culture and national unity are not so much experienced by people who have the most experience with immigrants, but could be just a perception of those without much experience with immigrants.	1_1.3.3.2.	From this it appears that any negative consequences for culture and national unity are not so much experienced by people who have the most experience with immigrants, but could be just a perception of those without much experience with immigrants.	con	
most migrants and bme voters voted for remain — the obvious consequence is that, in high immigration areas, the remain vote was stronger. it has nothing to do with experience of immigration/immigrants. this argument would only be relevant and true if migrants from the last 50 years had not voted.	1_1.3.3.3.	Most migrants and BME voters voted for remain — the obvious consequence is that, in high immigration areas, the remain vote was stronger. It has nothing to do with experience of immigration/immigrants. This argument would only be relevant and true if migrants from the last 50 years had not voted.	pro	Citizens from other European countries (apart from Ireland, Malta and Cyprus) did not get to vote in the Brexit Referendum.
citizens from other european countries (apart from ireland, malta and cyprus) did not get to vote in the brexit referendum.	1_1.3.3.3.1.	Citizens from other European countries (apart from Ireland, Malta and Cyprus) did not get to vote in the Brexit Referendum.	con	Most EU migrants in the UK do not apply for citizenship.
most eu migrants in the uk do not apply for citizenship.	1_1.3.3.3.1.1.	Most EU migrants in the UK do not apply for citizenship.	con	In 2016 30,000 EU nationals applied for citizenship, out of approximately 117,000. This is around a quarter.
in 2016 30,000 eu nationals applied for citizenship, out of approximately 117,000. this is around a quarter.	1_1.3.3.3.1.1.1.	In 2016 30,000 EU nationals applied for citizenship, out of approximately 117,000. This is around a quarter.	con	
even if this were true, it would not be surprising that people who have not yet been negatively affected by immigration would be apprehensive of those effects reaching them — as them not living in high immigration areas does not mean they cannot know how immigration affects their country.	1_1.3.3.4.	Even if this were true, it would not be surprising that people who have not yet been negatively affected by immigration would be apprehensive of those effects reaching them — as them not living in high immigration areas does not mean they cannot know how immigration affects their country.	pro	
eu membership confers benefits and privileges that help preserve british culture.	1_1.3.4.	EU membership confers benefits and privileges that help preserve British culture.	con	EU programs are essential to protecting cultural heritage, including archaeological sites, monuments, museums, and artwork, that distinctively represent the culture within its member states. Brexit would mean that Britain would lose access to these programs which promote British culture.	The UK has been part of the EU for over 40 years and still has a distinct culture. This suggests that EU membership is, at the very least, not a threat to British culture.	The EU supports regional culture, and thus regional identity, more than the UK government does.	Many British cultural leaders believe that a hard Brexit will hurt their nation's artistic reputation, as it curtails the ability of most British artists to work freely abroad and international artists to work in the UK. This also hurts the perception of the UK as an iconic cultural hub.
eu programs are essential to protecting cultural heritage, including archaeological sites, monuments, museums, and artwork, that distinctively represent the culture within its member states. brexit would mean that britain would lose access to these programs which promote british culture.	1_1.3.4.1.	EU programs are essential to protecting cultural heritage, including archaeological sites, monuments, museums, and artwork, that distinctively represent the culture within its member states. Brexit would mean that Britain would lose access to these programs which promote British culture.	con	The Creative Industries Federation (an association of members from UK creative industries) states that 96 per cent of its members supported remaining in the EU and 84 per cent of its members believed the outcome of the referendum was important to the future success of their organisations, as Brexit would result in a loss of EU funding and support for cultural programs.	Protecting archeological sites is almost useless if the overall culture and identity of the country are being diluted.	The money that the UK (who contributes more than it receives gives to the EU could be used directly in their own country. Leaving the EU would thus be more positive than negative.
the creative industries federation (an association of members from uk creative industries) states that 96 per cent of its members supported remaining in the eu and 84 per cent of its members believed the outcome of the referendum was important to the future success of their organisations, as brexit would result in a loss of eu funding and support for cultural programs.	1_1.3.4.1.1.	The Creative Industries Federation (an association of members from UK creative industries) states that 96 per cent of its members supported remaining in the EU and 84 per cent of its members believed the outcome of the referendum was important to the future success of their organisations, as Brexit would result in a loss of EU funding and support for cultural programs.	con	
protecting archeological sites is almost useless if the overall culture and identity of the country are being diluted.	1_1.3.4.1.2.	Protecting archeological sites is almost useless if the overall culture and identity of the country are being diluted.	pro	
the money that the uk (who contributes more than it receives gives to the eu could be used directly in their own country. leaving the eu would thus be more positive than negative.	1_1.3.4.1.3.	The money that the UK (who contributes more than it receives gives to the EU could be used directly in their own country. Leaving the EU would thus be more positive than negative.	pro	This claim also does not take into account those benefits the UK derives which cannot easily be measured in terms of money, i.e. the increased quality of goods consumed, the efficiencies for companies of having a wider workforce, the healthcare enjoyed by UK pensioners and others in other countries.
this claim also does not take into account those benefits the uk derives which cannot easily be measured in terms of money, i.e. the increased quality of goods consumed, the efficiencies for companies of having a wider workforce, the healthcare enjoyed by uk pensioners and others in other countries.	1_1.3.4.1.3.1.	This claim also does not take into account those benefits the UK derives which cannot easily be measured in terms of money, i.e. the increased quality of goods consumed, the efficiencies for companies of having a wider workforce, the healthcare enjoyed by UK pensioners and others in other countries.	con	The EU could achieve higher efficiencies for the member states because it allows division of labour and higher specialisation (see Adam Smith. This is the ideal the EU (ought to) work towards.
the eu could achieve higher efficiencies for the member states because it allows division of labour and higher specialisation (see adam smith. this is the ideal the eu (ought to) work towards.	1_1.3.4.1.3.1.1.	The EU could achieve higher efficiencies for the member states because it allows division of labour and higher specialisation (see Adam Smith. This is the ideal the EU (ought to) work towards.	con	
the uk has been part of the eu for over 40 years and still has a distinct culture. this suggests that eu membership is, at the very least, not a threat to british culture.	1_1.3.4.2.	The UK has been part of the EU for over 40 years and still has a distinct culture. This suggests that EU membership is, at the very least, not a threat to British culture.	con	There is plenty of evidence that British culture (however you define it) is robust enough to withstand outside influence. There is no evidence that Germans are less German or French are less French because of the EU.	Countries even further intregrated into the EU, such as France and Germany, have also been able to maintain their cultural identity.
there is plenty of evidence that british culture (however you define it) is robust enough to withstand outside influence. there is no evidence that germans are less german or french are less french because of the eu.	1_1.3.4.2.1.	There is plenty of evidence that British culture (however you define it) is robust enough to withstand outside influence. There is no evidence that Germans are less German or French are less French because of the EU.	con	
countries even further intregrated into the eu, such as france and germany, have also been able to maintain their cultural identity.	1_1.3.4.2.2.	Countries even further intregrated into the EU, such as France and Germany, have also been able to maintain their cultural identity.	con	
the eu supports regional culture, and thus regional identity, more than the uk government does.	1_1.3.4.3.	The EU supports regional culture, and thus regional identity, more than the UK government does.	con	The European Capital of Culture Programme has supported regional culture twice in the UK, once in Glasgow and once in Liverpool.	Between 2015-2016, the UK benefitted from €11.3 million. In 2018, the total Arts Council England (which distributes government arts funds) budget is £622 million, with the amount spent outside London targeted to rise from 70% to 75%. The EU's support for regional culture is minor compared to the UK's.
the european capital of culture programme has supported regional culture twice in the uk, once in glasgow and once in liverpool.	1_1.3.4.3.1.	The European Capital of Culture Programme has supported regional culture twice in the UK, once in Glasgow and once in Liverpool.	con	
between 2015-2016, the uk benefitted from €11.3 million. in 2018, the total arts council england (which distributes government arts funds) budget is £622 million, with the amount spent outside london targeted to rise from 70% to 75%. the eu's support for regional culture is minor compared to the uk's.	1_1.3.4.3.2.	Between 2015-2016, the UK benefitted from €11.3 million. In 2018, the total Arts Council England (which distributes government arts funds) budget is £622 million, with the amount spent outside London targeted to rise from 70% to 75%. The EU's support for regional culture is minor compared to the UK's.	pro	The EU budget is €290 per capita, while the UK government budget is £9350 per capita. Thus making a direct comparision between €11m and £622m is extremely disingenuous.
the eu budget is €290 per capita, while the uk government budget is £9350 per capita. thus making a direct comparision between €11m and £622m is extremely disingenuous.	1_1.3.4.3.2.1.	The EU budget is €290 per capita, while the UK government budget is £9350 per capita. Thus making a direct comparision between €11m and £622m is extremely disingenuous.	con	
many british cultural leaders believe that a hard brexit will hurt their nation's artistic reputation, as it curtails the ability of most british artists to work freely abroad and international artists to work in the uk. this also hurts the perception of the uk as an iconic cultural hub.	1_1.3.4.4.	Many British cultural leaders believe that a hard Brexit will hurt their nation's artistic reputation, as it curtails the ability of most British artists to work freely abroad and international artists to work in the UK. This also hurts the perception of the UK as an iconic cultural hub.	con	The Creative Industries Federation (an association of members from UK creative industries) states that 96 per cent of its members supported remaining in the EU and 84 per cent of its members believed the outcome of the referendum was important to the future success of their organisations, as Brexit would result in a loss of EU funding and support for cultural programs.	Travel restrictions, which would result from a hard Brexit, will add large financial and logistical costs to touring companies and so prevent many British theatre companies from touring.	Travelling won’t suddenly become impossible without the EU, and it doesn’t change anything for non-EU artists or British artists travelling outside of the EU.	Britain’s iconic cultural hub identity is independent from the EU, as it predates it — wether you take into account London being a capital of culture in the 19th century, or the popular culture boom in the interwar era. Believing brexit will hurt the UK as a culture hub is greatly underestimating the country’s appeal and history.
travel restrictions, which would result from a hard brexit, will add large financial and logistical costs to touring companies and so prevent many british theatre companies from touring.	1_1.3.4.4.2.	Travel restrictions, which would result from a hard Brexit, will add large financial and logistical costs to touring companies and so prevent many British theatre companies from touring.	con	
travelling won’t suddenly become impossible without the eu, and it doesn’t change anything for non-eu artists or british artists travelling outside of the eu.	1_1.3.4.4.3.	Travelling won’t suddenly become impossible without the EU, and it doesn’t change anything for non-EU artists or British artists travelling outside of the EU.	pro	
britain’s iconic cultural hub identity is independent from the eu, as it predates it — wether you take into account london being a capital of culture in the 19th century, or the popular culture boom in the interwar era. believing brexit will hurt the uk as a culture hub is greatly underestimating the country’s appeal and history.	1_1.3.4.4.4.	Britain’s iconic cultural hub identity is independent from the EU, as it predates it — wether you take into account London being a capital of culture in the 19th century, or the popular culture boom in the interwar era. Believing brexit will hurt the UK as a culture hub is greatly underestimating the country’s appeal and history.	pro	
british culture is primarily influenced by america, even as a member of the eu. many leave voters take no issue with american influence but protest cultural influence of other regions.	1_1.3.5.	British culture is primarily influenced by America, even as a member of the EU. Many Leave voters take no issue with American influence but protest cultural influence of other regions.	con	British media is made to be sellable to America as they are the largest and wealthiest English language culture market.	Language barriers make influence from European cultures slow to cross over and even slower to spread, but Americanisation permeates every level of British life.	One problem does not negate another, and one could say that at least it’s anglo-saxon culture. The fact is the problem of American influence is a different problem to that of European influence (especially this notion that the UK doesn’t really have its own culture, and is at best just an amalgam of other cultures — European and otherwise).
british media is made to be sellable to america as they are the largest and wealthiest english language culture market.	1_1.3.5.1.	British media is made to be sellable to America as they are the largest and wealthiest English language culture market.	con	
language barriers make influence from european cultures slow to cross over and even slower to spread, but americanisation permeates every level of british life.	1_1.3.5.2.	Language barriers make influence from European cultures slow to cross over and even slower to spread, but Americanisation permeates every level of British life.	con	
one problem does not negate another, and one could say that at least it’s anglo-saxon culture. the fact is the problem of american influence is a different problem to that of european influence (especially this notion that the uk doesn’t really have its own culture, and is at best just an amalgam of other cultures — european and otherwise).	1_1.3.5.3.	One problem does not negate another, and one could say that at least it’s anglo-saxon culture. The fact is the problem of American influence is a different problem to that of European influence (especially this notion that the UK doesn’t really have its own culture, and is at best just an amalgam of other cultures — European and otherwise).	pro	The Angles, Saxons and Jutes all came from mainland Europe, or from north Germany, Denmark and northern Holland to be more precise. America is itself a huge blend of cultures including German, Italian, Chinese, etc. so suggesting that they are culturally far closer to us is misleading.
the angles, saxons and jutes all came from mainland europe, or from north germany, denmark and northern holland to be more precise. america is itself a huge blend of cultures including german, italian, chinese, etc. so suggesting that they are culturally far closer to us is misleading.	1_1.3.5.3.1.	The Angles, Saxons and Jutes all came from mainland Europe, or from north Germany, Denmark and northern Holland to be more precise. America is itself a huge blend of cultures including German, Italian, Chinese, etc. so suggesting that they are culturally far closer to us is misleading.	con	
while immigration is not a problem in itself, if it is too large, and too fast, the people coming in cannot be assimilated to the country’s culture. thus, communities form that live apart from british culture and do not assimilate or identify with it. it harms british culture, and weakens social cohesion indeed.	1_1.3.6.	While immigration is not a problem in itself, if it is too large, and too fast, the people coming in cannot be assimilated to the country’s culture. Thus, communities form that live apart from British culture and do not assimilate or identify with it. It harms British culture, and weakens social cohesion indeed.	pro	The way UK immigration figures are calculated means that the numbers include a great many people who have no intention of becoming permanent residents of the UK. Students, seasonal workers, etc. form a large part of the "immigrant" population and they all tend to return to their home countries after a short stay. There's no need for such people to be assimilated, and no evidence that their clustering for mutual support while resident here inflicts any damage on British culture.	There's no reason why immigrants should be assimilated to the "country's culture". The desire to force them or persuade them to conform to whichever values someone decides to call British and to call them a problem if they don't is racism.	The issues raised - too many immigrants in isolated communities leading to lack of integration - are planning issues that could be mitigated bycarefully considered mix-use housing developments in the places where migrant work is required.	Culture is organic and evolves constantly, with each generation adding or removing customs and practices. Leaving the EU will do nothing to change this, as migration will still be allowed in both directions, even if in reduced quantities.	A major proportion of immigrants in the UK are not from the EU, but rather countries somehow tied in with the British Empire such as Pakistan, India, South Africa, Bangladesh, Nigeria. The control of borders for these immigrants has been resting with British authorities and is not an EU issue.
the way uk immigration figures are calculated means that the numbers include a great many people who have no intention of becoming permanent residents of the uk. students, seasonal workers, etc. form a large part of the "immigrant" population and they all tend to return to their home countries after a short stay. there's no need for such people to be assimilated, and no evidence that their clustering for mutual support while resident here inflicts any damage on british culture.	1_1.3.6.1.	The way UK immigration figures are calculated means that the numbers include a great many people who have no intention of becoming permanent residents of the UK. Students, seasonal workers, etc. form a large part of the "immigrant" population and they all tend to return to their home countries after a short stay. There's no need for such people to be assimilated, and no evidence that their clustering for mutual support while resident here inflicts any damage on British culture.	con	
there's no reason why immigrants should be assimilated to the "country's culture". the desire to force them or persuade them to conform to whichever values someone decides to call british and to call them a problem if they don't is racism.	1_1.3.6.2.	There's no reason why immigrants should be assimilated to the "country's culture". The desire to force them or persuade them to conform to whichever values someone decides to call British and to call them a problem if they don't is racism.	con	
the issues raised - too many immigrants in isolated communities leading to lack of integration - are planning issues that could be mitigated bycarefully considered mix-use housing developments in the places where migrant work is required.	1_1.3.6.3.	The issues raised - too many immigrants in isolated communities leading to lack of integration - are planning issues that could be mitigated bycarefully considered mix-use housing developments in the places where migrant work is required.	con	
culture is organic and evolves constantly, with each generation adding or removing customs and practices. leaving the eu will do nothing to change this, as migration will still be allowed in both directions, even if in reduced quantities.	1_1.3.6.4.	Culture is organic and evolves constantly, with each generation adding or removing customs and practices. Leaving the EU will do nothing to change this, as migration will still be allowed in both directions, even if in reduced quantities.	con	This means the British population will still be exposed to different cultures, customs and practices which each individual is allowed to choose to adopt or not (if the law permits).	The impact of on-screen world, whether television or internet, dwarfs that of real life. We interact much more with devices than we do with our neighbours, making any cultural impact they may have negligible.	Culture is indeed organic, however it needs time to assimilate various influences to make it its own. The lack of control over immigration policy weakens the ability to control the rate at which people come into the country, which in turn makes it harder to both assimilate immigrants and to integrate eventual cultural influences from them into (and not on top of) British culture.
this means the british population will still be exposed to different cultures, customs and practices which each individual is allowed to choose to adopt or not (if the law permits).	1_1.3.6.4.1.	This means the British population will still be exposed to different cultures, customs and practices which each individual is allowed to choose to adopt or not (if the law permits).	con	
the impact of on-screen world, whether television or internet, dwarfs that of real life. we interact much more with devices than we do with our neighbours, making any cultural impact they may have negligible.	1_1.3.6.4.2.	The impact of on-screen world, whether television or internet, dwarfs that of real life. We interact much more with devices than we do with our neighbours, making any cultural impact they may have negligible.	pro	
culture is indeed organic, however it needs time to assimilate various influences to make it its own. the lack of control over immigration policy weakens the ability to control the rate at which people come into the country, which in turn makes it harder to both assimilate immigrants and to integrate eventual cultural influences from them into (and not on top of) british culture.	1_1.3.6.4.3.	Culture is indeed organic, however it needs time to assimilate various influences to make it its own. The lack of control over immigration policy weakens the ability to control the rate at which people come into the country, which in turn makes it harder to both assimilate immigrants and to integrate eventual cultural influences from them into (and not on top of) British culture.	pro	There's no reason why immigrants should be assimilated to the "country's culture". The desire to force them or persuade them to conform to whichever values someone decides to call British and to call them a problem if they don't is racism.	Culture has no sensibilities so it needs no time so presumably this refers to bigots. This is about letting bigotry delay or even stop change.
culture has no sensibilities so it needs no time so presumably this refers to bigots. this is about letting bigotry delay or even stop change.	1_1.3.6.4.3.2.	Culture has no sensibilities so it needs no time so presumably this refers to bigots. This is about letting bigotry delay or even stop change.	con	
a major proportion of immigrants in the uk are not from the eu, but rather countries somehow tied in with the british empire such as pakistan, india, south africa, bangladesh, nigeria. the control of borders for these immigrants has been resting with british authorities and is not an eu issue.	1_1.3.6.5.	A major proportion of immigrants in the UK are not from the EU, but rather countries somehow tied in with the British Empire such as Pakistan, India, South Africa, Bangladesh, Nigeria. The control of borders for these immigrants has been resting with British authorities and is not an EU issue.	con	There has been a great increase of immigration from Europe in the last five to ten years, whether it be Western, or Eastern Europe (in particular Bulgaria and Romania). More accurately, immigration is on a downward trend from non-European countries, whereas immigration from EU-countries has greatly increased. Furthermore, there being strong non-EU immigration doesn’t mean EU-immigration cannot be a problem. Those are two different issues, and should be handled differently.	A lot of the immigration people were concerned about was illegal immigration, with the current migrant crisis, as the EU has been very lax in controlling its own borders. In this case, once migrants get into the EU, they can pretty much travel anywhere in it without much problems.
there has been a great increase of immigration from europe in the last five to ten years, whether it be western, or eastern europe (in particular bulgaria and romania). more accurately, immigration is on a downward trend from non-european countries, whereas immigration from eu-countries has greatly increased. furthermore, there being strong non-eu immigration doesn’t mean eu-immigration cannot be a problem. those are two different issues, and should be handled differently.	1_1.3.6.5.1.	There has been a great increase of immigration from Europe in the last five to ten years, whether it be Western, or Eastern Europe (in particular Bulgaria and Romania). More accurately, immigration is on a downward trend from non-European countries, whereas immigration from EU-countries has greatly increased. Furthermore, there being strong non-EU immigration doesn’t mean EU-immigration cannot be a problem. Those are two different issues, and should be handled differently.	pro	
a lot of the immigration people were concerned about was illegal immigration, with the current migrant crisis, as the eu has been very lax in controlling its own borders. in this case, once migrants get into the eu, they can pretty much travel anywhere in it without much problems.	1_1.3.6.5.2.	A lot of the immigration people were concerned about was illegal immigration, with the current migrant crisis, as the EU has been very lax in controlling its own borders. In this case, once migrants get into the EU, they can pretty much travel anywhere in it without much problems.	pro	
the eu is too dysfunctional for the uk.	1_1.4.	The EU is too dysfunctional for the UK.	pro	The EU wastes vast sums of money in decamping from Brussels to Strasbourg every month. If the EU is incapable of making the trivial decision to end this waste, then it is not capable of making more consequential decisions.	The EU has failed to address many of the economic problems that have developed since 2008.	The EU is not democratic.	Brexit is the ultimate expression of dysfunction and the EU an example of stability and union.	Since it has been shown that being an EU member is beneficial to the UK and the cost to the individual citizen minimal, then the efficiency, or lack of, of it's process is irrelevant.	In some cases it is the EU that protects British citizens from their own Government's dysfunction.	Dysfunction is completely subjective. Who's to say what is normal for a union of countries like those in Europe. The fact that they exist and have 28 member states strongly suggests that they are not, "deviating from the norms of social behavior in a way regarded as bad."	The UK would need to replace many of the EU's policies and institutions. These replacements will likely end up being more dysfunctional than the existing ones.
the eu wastes vast sums of money in decamping from brussels to strasbourg every month. if the eu is incapable of making the trivial decision to end this waste, then it is not capable of making more consequential decisions.	1_1.4.1.	The EU wastes vast sums of money in decamping from Brussels to Strasbourg every month. If the EU is incapable of making the trivial decision to end this waste, then it is not capable of making more consequential decisions.	pro	This is not an example of the EU being dysfunctional per se. It is also not a trivial decision, nor particularly challenging. The policy may be annoying and a strange distribution of wealth - one that ultimately benefits both towns at the expense of the entire block - but does not demonstrate dysfunction.	91% of MEPs oppose the commuting, with France the only country benefiting.	A cost of 0.06% of the overall Budget of the European Union is relatively trivial.	The UK government also inefficiently wastes vast sums of money on matters for which trivial decisions could be taken to end it.
this is not an example of the eu being dysfunctional per se. it is also not a trivial decision, nor particularly challenging. the policy may be annoying and a strange distribution of wealth - one that ultimately benefits both towns at the expense of the entire block - but does not demonstrate dysfunction.	1_1.4.1.1.	This is not an example of the EU being dysfunctional per se. It is also not a trivial decision, nor particularly challenging. The policy may be annoying and a strange distribution of wealth - one that ultimately benefits both towns at the expense of the entire block - but does not demonstrate dysfunction.	con	One function, entrusted to the EU, is to handle the vast sums of money it is given effectively. Therefore, wasting it in this way is a very good example of dysfunctionality.
one function, entrusted to the eu, is to handle the vast sums of money it is given effectively. therefore, wasting it in this way is a very good example of dysfunctionality.	1_1.4.1.1.1.	One function, entrusted to the EU, is to handle the vast sums of money it is given effectively. Therefore, wasting it in this way is a very good example of dysfunctionality.	pro	
91% of meps oppose the commuting, with france the only country benefiting.	1_1.4.1.2.	91% of MEPs oppose the commuting, with France the only country benefiting.	pro	
a cost of 0.06% of the overall budget of the european union is relatively trivial.	1_1.4.1.3.	A cost of 0.06% of the overall Budget of the European Union is relatively trivial.	con	
the uk government also inefficiently wastes vast sums of money on matters for which trivial decisions could be taken to end it.	1_1.4.1.4.	The UK government also inefficiently wastes vast sums of money on matters for which trivial decisions could be taken to end it.	con	The House of Lords is hugely wasteful as an institution. Its reform should be easy for the Government to achieve.	The UK Government has continued to pour money into HS2, despite clear warnings from experts that it is a waste of money and a lack of public support.
the house of lords is hugely wasteful as an institution. its reform should be easy for the government to achieve.	1_1.4.1.4.1.	The House of Lords is hugely wasteful as an institution. Its reform should be easy for the Government to achieve.	con	The House of Lords has 778 members, vastly more than necessary for its function.	The daily cost to sustain some peers in the Lords is 25 times higher than most members of the House of Commons.
the house of lords has 778 members, vastly more than necessary for its function.	1_1.4.1.4.1.1.	The House of Lords has 778 members, vastly more than necessary for its function.	con	The US Senate, whose role is roughly equivalent to the Lords, functions with just 100 members.
the us senate, whose role is roughly equivalent to the lords, functions with just 100 members.	1_1.4.1.4.1.1.1.	The US Senate, whose role is roughly equivalent to the Lords, functions with just 100 members.	con	
the daily cost to sustain some peers in the lords is 25 times higher than most members of the house of commons.	1_1.4.1.4.1.2.	The daily cost to sustain some peers in the Lords is 25 times higher than most members of the House of Commons.	con	
the uk government has continued to pour money into hs2, despite clear warnings from experts that it is a waste of money and a lack of public support.	1_1.4.1.4.2.	The UK Government has continued to pour money into HS2, despite clear warnings from experts that it is a waste of money and a lack of public support.	con	
the eu has failed to address many of the economic problems that have developed since 2008.	1_1.4.2.	The EU has failed to address many of the economic problems that have developed since 2008.	pro	It is not an agreed area of EU competence to intervene in sovereign member states' economic affairs. Therefore it is not to be expected that the EU would address member states' internal economic problems. This point appears to conflate EU membership with the adoption of the Euro, which clearly the UK has not joined. And the link in question is very old news.	Many countries outside the EU, especially the USA, also suffered a deep recession starting in 2008. Blaming the EU for this is wrong.
it is not an agreed area of eu competence to intervene in sovereign member states' economic affairs. therefore it is not to be expected that the eu would address member states' internal economic problems. this point appears to conflate eu membership with the adoption of the euro, which clearly the uk has not joined. and the link in question is very old news.	1_1.4.2.1.	It is not an agreed area of EU competence to intervene in sovereign member states' economic affairs. Therefore it is not to be expected that the EU would address member states' internal economic problems. This point appears to conflate EU membership with the adoption of the Euro, which clearly the UK has not joined. And the link in question is very old news.	con	
many countries outside the eu, especially the usa, also suffered a deep recession starting in 2008. blaming the eu for this is wrong.	1_1.4.2.2.	Many countries outside the EU, especially the USA, also suffered a deep recession starting in 2008. Blaming the EU for this is wrong.	con	
the eu is not democratic.	1_1.4.3.	The EU is not democratic.	pro	Two of the three pillars of UK governance are unelected, i.e. 'The House of Lords' and ‘The Judiciary’.	One of the most powerful EU bodies, the College of Commissioners, is not democratically elected.	When passing laws the unelected bureaucrats of the EU work in a co-decision process with elected representatives of the European Parliament.	The democratic deficit within the EU has left many feeling disenfranchised and led to the rise of right wing parties.	The European Commission acts as the EU's Civil Service. Given most Civil Services requires individuals with specialised skills and training, it is unreasonable to expect them to be elected.	Democracy does not necessarily mean the same thing in the EU and the UK. The EU needs to strike a consensus between the different democracies of the Member States, some being coalition systems with multiple parties, some with first-past-the-post systems, etc. The EU cannot have the same type of democracy as a state, because it is a supranational organisation, working for the benefit of citizens and countries.	Member states must have strong democratic institutions in order to join the EU.	European Parliament elections suffer from low turnouts, and increasingly disengaged electorates.	Even the EU recognizes that many voters feel it suffers from a democratic deficit.	Democracy is not a guarantee of functionality.	The European Union Parliament is elected using proportional representation, ensuring it is more democratic than the UK's own parliament.	The EU's democratic legitimacy is also derived from participation of democratic national governments and leaders in the decision-making process. Some EU decisions are taken on an international basis and excludes Parliament (supranational legislature) from the decision-making process.	Due to its large population and dominating economy, Germany has had major influence over the vast majority of EU policies, much to the dissatisfaction of other member states.	The EU is anti-democratic. It routinely attempts to enforce its will on member states regardless of democratic direction, as it did regarding Ireland's vote against the Lisbon Treaty. If Britain wishes to have political power, rights and freedoms, it must leave the EU. The Guardian on the Lisbon Vote
two of the three pillars of uk governance are unelected, i.e. 'the house of lords' and ‘the judiciary’.	1_1.4.3.1.	Two of the three pillars of UK governance are unelected, i.e. 'The House of Lords' and ‘The Judiciary’.	con	
one of the most powerful eu bodies, the college of commissioners, is not democratically elected.	1_1.4.3.2.	One of the most powerful EU bodies, the College of Commissioners, is not democratically elected.	pro	The European commission is unelected and have been active since 2007. We may elect our MEPs but the main policy makers are still unelected and while they are accountable to the European parliament who can censure their decisions it is by no means a perfect system as it falls to the foibles of international politics.	One potential Commissioner is nominated by the ruling (democratically elected) national government of each member state.  These suggestions are then confirmed by the democratically elected European Parliament.  So, the public vote for their own national government and, in doing so, place their trust in them to choose a suitable Commissioner, in an equivalent way to that which the UK public places their trust in their elected House of Commons to select a suitable Prime Minister.	The President of the Commission (Jean-Claude Juncker) was elected by the Spitzenkandidat process.
the european commission is unelected and have been active since 2007. we may elect our meps but the main policy makers are still unelected and while they are accountable to the european parliament who can censure their decisions it is by no means a perfect system as it falls to the foibles of international politics.	1_1.4.3.2.1.	The European commission is unelected and have been active since 2007. We may elect our MEPs but the main policy makers are still unelected and while they are accountable to the European parliament who can censure their decisions it is by no means a perfect system as it falls to the foibles of international politics.	pro	Commissioners are selected by democratically elected Governments. Having no faith in our Government choosing Commissioners to represent us within the EU suggests that we have no faith in them governing us with the full sovereignty Brexit will deliver.	The EU is no less democratic than the UK. The British cabinet ministers are unelected; they are selected by the PM.
commissioners are selected by democratically elected governments. having no faith in our government choosing commissioners to represent us within the eu suggests that we have no faith in them governing us with the full sovereignty brexit will deliver.	1_1.4.3.2.1.1.	Commissioners are selected by democratically elected Governments. Having no faith in our Government choosing Commissioners to represent us within the EU suggests that we have no faith in them governing us with the full sovereignty Brexit will deliver.	con	
the eu is no less democratic than the uk. the british cabinet ministers are unelected; they are selected by the pm.	1_1.4.3.2.1.2.	The EU is no less democratic than the UK. The British cabinet ministers are unelected; they are selected by the PM.	con	
one potential commissioner is nominated by the ruling (democratically elected) national government of each member state.  these suggestions are then confirmed by the democratically elected european parliament.  so, the public vote for their own national government and, in doing so, place their trust in them to choose a suitable commissioner, in an equivalent way to that which the uk public places their trust in their elected house of commons to select a suitable prime minister.	1_1.4.3.2.2.	One potential Commissioner is nominated by the ruling (democratically elected) national government of each member state.  These suggestions are then confirmed by the democratically elected European Parliament.  So, the public vote for their own national government and, in doing so, place their trust in them to choose a suitable Commissioner, in an equivalent way to that which the UK public places their trust in their elected House of Commons to select a suitable Prime Minister.	con	No one asks their local/national candidates who their pick for EU Commissioner would be let alone lets it influence their vote. People elect them for local/national matters not EU wide direction.	In the UK with FPTP voting only twice in the last 100 years has the ruling party earned \>50% of the vote. From that the party picks the PM, and then the PM decides the Commissioner. This is too many steps from the people to the Commission for popular will to reasonably be carried out.
no one asks their local/national candidates who their pick for eu commissioner would be let alone lets it influence their vote. people elect them for local/national matters not eu wide direction.	1_1.4.3.2.2.1.	No one asks their local/national candidates who their pick for EU Commissioner would be let alone lets it influence their vote. People elect them for local/national matters not EU wide direction.	pro	
in the uk with fptp voting only twice in the last 100 years has the ruling party earned \>50% of the vote. from that the party picks the pm, and then the pm decides the commissioner. this is too many steps from the people to the commission for popular will to reasonably be carried out.	1_1.4.3.2.2.2.	In the UK with FPTP voting only twice in the last 100 years has the ruling party earned \>50% of the vote. From that the party picks the PM, and then the PM decides the Commissioner. This is too many steps from the people to the Commission for popular will to reasonably be carried out.	pro	
the president of the commission (jean-claude juncker) was elected by the spitzenkandidat process.	1_1.4.3.2.3.	The President of the Commission (Jean-Claude Juncker) was elected by the Spitzenkandidat process.	con	
when passing laws the unelected bureaucrats of the eu work in a co-decision process with elected representatives of the european parliament.	1_1.4.3.3.	When passing laws the unelected bureaucrats of the EU work in a co-decision process with elected representatives of the European Parliament.	con	In the UK, civil servants and the House of Lords (both groups of unelected bureaucrats) work in a co-decision process with British MPs (the elected representatives).
in the uk, civil servants and the house of lords (both groups of unelected bureaucrats) work in a co-decision process with british mps (the elected representatives).	1_1.4.3.3.1.	In the UK, civil servants and the House of Lords (both groups of unelected bureaucrats) work in a co-decision process with British MPs (the elected representatives).	pro	
the democratic deficit within the eu has left many feeling disenfranchised and led to the rise of right wing parties.	1_1.4.3.4.	The democratic deficit within the EU has left many feeling disenfranchised and led to the rise of right wing parties.	pro	Growth of far-right politics is growing around the world, including in America and Australia. This rise has probably much more the effect of the Global Economic Crisis, where people around the world are dissatisfied with wage freezes, greater job insecurity and their politicians austerity policies reducing spending on infrastructure. Rise of the American Far Right	The rise of right wing parties doesn't make the EU undemocratic.
growth of far-right politics is growing around the world, including in america and australia. this rise has probably much more the effect of the global economic crisis, where people around the world are dissatisfied with wage freezes, greater job insecurity and their politicians austerity policies reducing spending on infrastructure. rise of the american far right	1_1.4.3.4.1.	Growth of far-right politics is growing around the world, including in America and Australia. This rise has probably much more the effect of the Global Economic Crisis, where people around the world are dissatisfied with wage freezes, greater job insecurity and their politicians austerity policies reducing spending on infrastructure. Rise of the American Far Right	con	
the rise of right wing parties doesn't make the eu undemocratic.	1_1.4.3.4.2.	The rise of right wing parties doesn't make the EU undemocratic.	con	
the european commission acts as the eu's civil service. given most civil services requires individuals with specialised skills and training, it is unreasonable to expect them to be elected.	1_1.4.3.5.	The European Commission acts as the EU's Civil Service. Given most Civil Services requires individuals with specialised skills and training, it is unreasonable to expect them to be elected.	con	
democracy does not necessarily mean the same thing in the eu and the uk. the eu needs to strike a consensus between the different democracies of the member states, some being coalition systems with multiple parties, some with first-past-the-post systems, etc. the eu cannot have the same type of democracy as a state, because it is a supranational organisation, working for the benefit of citizens and countries.	1_1.4.3.6.	Democracy does not necessarily mean the same thing in the EU and the UK. The EU needs to strike a consensus between the different democracies of the Member States, some being coalition systems with multiple parties, some with first-past-the-post systems, etc. The EU cannot have the same type of democracy as a state, because it is a supranational organisation, working for the benefit of citizens and countries.	con	
member states must have strong democratic institutions in order to join the eu.	1_1.4.3.7.	Member states must have strong democratic institutions in order to join the EU.	con	There are four Nazis sitting on the European Parliament, three elected with the Greek Golden Dawn, and one elected with the German National Democratic Party. Their wages are paid by the EU.	Poland and Hungary have been making increasingly illiberal and anti-democratic changes in their governance over recent years. It is unclear if the EU has the capacity to maintain democracy among its member states.	Following Turkey's dramatic shift toward illiberalism, European Commissioner Johannes Hahn stated that its bid to join the EU was effectively finished.	EU's accession criteria doesn't prove or refute the (un)democratic nature of the EU itself.
there are four nazis sitting on the european parliament, three elected with the greek golden dawn, and one elected with the german national democratic party. their wages are paid by the eu.	1_1.4.3.7.1.	There are four Nazis sitting on the European Parliament, three elected with the Greek Golden Dawn, and one elected with the German National Democratic Party. Their wages are paid by the EU.	pro	Allowing extreme parties is a characteristic of liberal democracy, not a lack of it. Golden dawn and NDP were elected with enough Greek/German votes to earn their position. Proportional representation requirements for MEP elections are designed to allow minorities a voice, no matter how unpleasant that voice may be. Until convicted of a crime, they have the right to become elected in a democracy, so they shouldn't be seen as a point against the EU's democratic institutions.
allowing extreme parties is a characteristic of liberal democracy, not a lack of it. golden dawn and ndp were elected with enough greek/german votes to earn their position. proportional representation requirements for mep elections are designed to allow minorities a voice, no matter how unpleasant that voice may be. until convicted of a crime, they have the right to become elected in a democracy, so they shouldn't be seen as a point against the eu's democratic institutions.	1_1.4.3.7.1.1.	Allowing extreme parties is a characteristic of liberal democracy, not a lack of it. Golden dawn and NDP were elected with enough Greek/German votes to earn their position. Proportional representation requirements for MEP elections are designed to allow minorities a voice, no matter how unpleasant that voice may be. Until convicted of a crime, they have the right to become elected in a democracy, so they shouldn't be seen as a point against the EU's democratic institutions.	con	Allowing Nazis to be elected is a characteristic of a liberal democracy, but Nazis actually managing to get elected is testament of weak and corrupt democratic institutions.
allowing nazis to be elected is a characteristic of a liberal democracy, but nazis actually managing to get elected is testament of weak and corrupt democratic institutions.	1_1.4.3.7.1.1.1.	Allowing Nazis to be elected is a characteristic of a liberal democracy, but Nazis actually managing to get elected is testament of weak and corrupt democratic institutions.	pro	
poland and hungary have been making increasingly illiberal and anti-democratic changes in their governance over recent years. it is unclear if the eu has the capacity to maintain democracy among its member states.	1_1.4.3.7.2.	Poland and Hungary have been making increasingly illiberal and anti-democratic changes in their governance over recent years. It is unclear if the EU has the capacity to maintain democracy among its member states.	pro	
following turkey's dramatic shift toward illiberalism, european commissioner johannes hahn stated that its bid to join the eu was effectively finished.	1_1.4.3.7.3.	Following Turkey's dramatic shift toward illiberalism, European Commissioner Johannes Hahn stated that its bid to join the EU was effectively finished.	con	This is no longer the case.
this is no longer the case.	1_1.4.3.7.3.1.	This is no longer the case.	pro	The article states that the EU might attempt to strengthen diplomatic relationships, but does not suggest that this comes anywhere close to the threshold required to join the EU.
the article states that the eu might attempt to strengthen diplomatic relationships, but does not suggest that this comes anywhere close to the threshold required to join the eu.	1_1.4.3.7.3.1.1.	The article states that the EU might attempt to strengthen diplomatic relationships, but does not suggest that this comes anywhere close to the threshold required to join the EU.	pro	
eu's accession criteria doesn't prove or refute the (un)democratic nature of the eu itself.	1_1.4.3.7.4.	EU's accession criteria doesn't prove or refute the (un)democratic nature of the EU itself.	pro	
european parliament elections suffer from low turnouts, and increasingly disengaged electorates.	1_1.4.3.8.	European Parliament elections suffer from low turnouts, and increasingly disengaged electorates.	pro	This does not make the EU a non-democracy; the United States suffers from similarly low voter turnouts.
this does not make the eu a non-democracy; the united states suffers from similarly low voter turnouts.	1_1.4.3.8.1.	This does not make the EU a non-democracy; the United States suffers from similarly low voter turnouts.	con	
even the eu recognizes that many voters feel it suffers from a democratic deficit.	1_1.4.3.9.	Even the EU recognizes that many voters feel it suffers from a democratic deficit.	pro	The fact that the EU publicly recognizes this is the mark of a responsive governance system.	The EU has acted to correct this. The democratic basis of the EU has been the European Parliament whose members have been elected by the electorate of the member states. While this is democratic, the electorate places more significance on their votes for their own national government than they do for their MEP, and are subsequently disenchanted that the European Parliament can overrule their national Government. Had the UK not chosen to pursue Brexit this discrepancy would have been corrected.	The public opinion about the democratic deficit in the EU doesn't necessarily reflect reality.
the fact that the eu publicly recognizes this is the mark of a responsive governance system.	1_1.4.3.9.1.	The fact that the EU publicly recognizes this is the mark of a responsive governance system.	con	
the eu has acted to correct this. the democratic basis of the eu has been the european parliament whose members have been elected by the electorate of the member states. while this is democratic, the electorate places more significance on their votes for their own national government than they do for their mep, and are subsequently disenchanted that the european parliament can overrule their national government. had the uk not chosen to pursue brexit this discrepancy would have been corrected.	1_1.4.3.9.2.	The EU has acted to correct this. The democratic basis of the EU has been the European Parliament whose members have been elected by the electorate of the member states. While this is democratic, the electorate places more significance on their votes for their own national government than they do for their MEP, and are subsequently disenchanted that the European Parliament can overrule their national Government. Had the UK not chosen to pursue Brexit this discrepancy would have been corrected.	con	
the public opinion about the democratic deficit in the eu doesn't necessarily reflect reality.	1_1.4.3.9.3.	The public opinion about the democratic deficit in the EU doesn't necessarily reflect reality.	con	
democracy is not a guarantee of functionality.	1_1.4.3.10.	Democracy is not a guarantee of functionality.	con	The Chinese Government is relatively functional, despite there being virtually no democracy in China.	Ukraine has relatively strong democratic institutions and yet has also been ranked as the 9th most corrupt in a survey of 55 countries.
the chinese government is relatively functional, despite there being virtually no democracy in china.	1_1.4.3.10.1.	The Chinese Government is relatively functional, despite there being virtually no democracy in China.	con	The Chinese government, which has no real democratic obligations or accountability, is far better at investing in long term infrastructure growth projects.	China was given a 0 score for ''Electoral Process and Pluralism" in the ECU's Democracy Index.	From 1960-2016, China had the highest average annual growth rate at 6.61% of any country in the world.
the chinese government, which has no real democratic obligations or accountability, is far better at investing in long term infrastructure growth projects.	1_1.4.3.10.1.1.	The Chinese government, which has no real democratic obligations or accountability, is far better at investing in long term infrastructure growth projects.	con	
china was given a 0 score for ''electoral process and pluralism" in the ecu's democracy index.	1_1.4.3.10.1.2.	China was given a 0 score for ''Electoral Process and Pluralism" in the ECU's Democracy Index.	con	
from 1960-2016, china had the highest average annual growth rate at 6.61% of any country in the world.	1_1.4.3.10.1.3.	From 1960-2016, China had the highest average annual growth rate at 6.61% of any country in the world.	con	
ukraine has relatively strong democratic institutions and yet has also been ranked as the 9th most corrupt in a survey of 55 countries.	1_1.4.3.10.2.	Ukraine has relatively strong democratic institutions and yet has also been ranked as the 9th most corrupt in a survey of 55 countries.	con	
the european union parliament is elected using proportional representation, ensuring it is more democratic than the uk's own parliament.	1_1.4.3.11.	The European Union Parliament is elected using proportional representation, ensuring it is more democratic than the UK's own parliament.	con	
the eu's democratic legitimacy is also derived from participation of democratic national governments and leaders in the decision-making process. some eu decisions are taken on an international basis and excludes parliament (supranational legislature) from the decision-making process.	1_1.4.3.12.	The EU's democratic legitimacy is also derived from participation of democratic national governments and leaders in the decision-making process. Some EU decisions are taken on an international basis and excludes Parliament (supranational legislature) from the decision-making process.	con	
due to its large population and dominating economy, germany has had major influence over the vast majority of eu policies, much to the dissatisfaction of other member states.	1_1.4.3.13.	Due to its large population and dominating economy, Germany has had major influence over the vast majority of EU policies, much to the dissatisfaction of other member states.	pro	The same could be said about British politics, where labour and conservative political parties have major control and influence, to the dissatisfaction of other parties/independants.	Germany has been the principal force behind EU austerity measures throughout the Eurozone, particularly in Greece.	Large and powerful states/regions typically have power over smaller and weaker ones, irrespective of their place in/out of the EU.	Influence or soft power might differ among EU member states, but each EU member state has only one vote in the EU Council and European Council. Therefore decisions are taken democratically with a consent of majority member states.
the same could be said about british politics, where labour and conservative political parties have major control and influence, to the dissatisfaction of other parties/independants.	1_1.4.3.13.1.	The same could be said about British politics, where labour and conservative political parties have major control and influence, to the dissatisfaction of other parties/independants.	con	
germany has been the principal force behind eu austerity measures throughout the eurozone, particularly in greece.	1_1.4.3.13.2.	Germany has been the principal force behind EU austerity measures throughout the Eurozone, particularly in Greece.	pro	Greece has a huge culture of Tax Evasion which it has been reluctant to tackle, as well as hiding its debt from the EU when it joined. The EU could not afford to continue bailing out Greece to the cost of other nation states including Britain when it made no real attempt at tackling it's own economic problems.
greece has a huge culture of tax evasion which it has been reluctant to tackle, as well as hiding its debt from the eu when it joined. the eu could not afford to continue bailing out greece to the cost of other nation states including britain when it made no real attempt at tackling it's own economic problems.	1_1.4.3.13.2.1.	Greece has a huge culture of Tax Evasion which it has been reluctant to tackle, as well as hiding its debt from the EU when it joined. The EU could not afford to continue bailing out Greece to the cost of other nation states including Britain when it made no real attempt at tackling it's own economic problems.	con	
large and powerful states/regions typically have power over smaller and weaker ones, irrespective of their place in/out of the eu.	1_1.4.3.13.3.	Large and powerful states/regions typically have power over smaller and weaker ones, irrespective of their place in/out of the EU.	con	England and London similarly have a huge influence over UK politics, much to the dissatisfaction of other areas.	Under any reasonable democratic system, a larger share of the population should equate to a larger degree of political leverage.
england and london similarly have a huge influence over uk politics, much to the dissatisfaction of other areas.	1_1.4.3.13.3.1.	England and London similarly have a huge influence over UK politics, much to the dissatisfaction of other areas.	con	HS2 is a project that would primarily benefit London, and is opposed by the vast majority of people living in northern communities
hs2 is a project that would primarily benefit london, and is opposed by the vast majority of people living in northern communities	1_1.4.3.13.3.1.1.	HS2 is a project that would primarily benefit London, and is opposed by the vast majority of people living in northern communities	con	
under any reasonable democratic system, a larger share of the population should equate to a larger degree of political leverage.	1_1.4.3.13.3.2.	Under any reasonable democratic system, a larger share of the population should equate to a larger degree of political leverage.	con	
influence or soft power might differ among eu member states, but each eu member state has only one vote in the eu council and european council. therefore decisions are taken democratically with a consent of majority member states.	1_1.4.3.13.4.	Influence or soft power might differ among EU member states, but each EU member state has only one vote in the EU Council and European Council. Therefore decisions are taken democratically with a consent of majority member states.	con	
the eu is anti-democratic. it routinely attempts to enforce its will on member states regardless of democratic direction, as it did regarding ireland's vote against the lisbon treaty. if britain wishes to have political power, rights and freedoms, it must leave the eu. the guardian on the lisbon vote	1_1.4.3.14.	The EU is anti-democratic. It routinely attempts to enforce its will on member states regardless of democratic direction, as it did regarding Ireland's vote against the Lisbon Treaty. If Britain wishes to have political power, rights and freedoms, it must leave the EU. The Guardian on the Lisbon Vote	pro	This has happened three times in EU referendums – in Denmark on the Maastricht Treaty in 1992-3, Ireland on the Nice Treaty in 2001-2, and Ireland again on the Lisbon Treaty in 2008-9.	For all three repeated EU referendums, the governments sought reassurances from the EU on the controversial themes of the first campaign. This allowed them to ask the same question again, but address the issues raised by the initial vote.	Scotland hasn't voted for a Conservative Government in decades and yet are generally controlled by Tories in Westminster. Being in a political union will inevitably involve compromises as well as benefits.	The situation in Ireland changed after they voted against the Lisbon treaty so they put it to the vote again. It is a strange kind of democracy that cannot allow the electorate to change their mind.
this has happened three times in eu referendums – in denmark on the maastricht treaty in 1992-3, ireland on the nice treaty in 2001-2, and ireland again on the lisbon treaty in 2008-9.	1_1.4.3.14.1.	This has happened three times in EU referendums – in Denmark on the Maastricht Treaty in 1992-3, Ireland on the Nice Treaty in 2001-2, and Ireland again on the Lisbon Treaty in 2008-9.	pro	
for all three repeated eu referendums, the governments sought reassurances from the eu on the controversial themes of the first campaign. this allowed them to ask the same question again, but address the issues raised by the initial vote.	1_1.4.3.14.2.	For all three repeated EU referendums, the governments sought reassurances from the EU on the controversial themes of the first campaign. This allowed them to ask the same question again, but address the issues raised by the initial vote.	con	
scotland hasn't voted for a conservative government in decades and yet are generally controlled by tories in westminster. being in a political union will inevitably involve compromises as well as benefits.	1_1.4.3.14.3.	Scotland hasn't voted for a Conservative Government in decades and yet are generally controlled by Tories in Westminster. Being in a political union will inevitably involve compromises as well as benefits.	con	
the situation in ireland changed after they voted against the lisbon treaty so they put it to the vote again. it is a strange kind of democracy that cannot allow the electorate to change their mind.	1_1.4.3.14.4.	The situation in Ireland changed after they voted against the Lisbon treaty so they put it to the vote again. It is a strange kind of democracy that cannot allow the electorate to change their mind.	con	
brexit is the ultimate expression of dysfunction and the eu an example of stability and union.	1_1.4.4.	Brexit is the ultimate expression of dysfunction and the EU an example of stability and union.	con	
since it has been shown that being an eu member is beneficial to the uk and the cost to the individual citizen minimal, then the efficiency, or lack of, of it's process is irrelevant.	1_1.4.5.	Since it has been shown that being an EU member is beneficial to the UK and the cost to the individual citizen minimal, then the efficiency, or lack of, of it's process is irrelevant.	con	
in some cases it is the eu that protects british citizens from their own government's dysfunction.	1_1.4.6.	In some cases it is the EU that protects British citizens from their own Government's dysfunction.	con	The EU may in fact protect the citizens of the UK, through legal oversight, from the negative effects of poor policy making or implementation. Vulnerable and marginalised groups have used the European Court of Justice to bring numerous claims against the British Government for human rights abuses.
the eu may in fact protect the citizens of the uk, through legal oversight, from the negative effects of poor policy making or implementation. vulnerable and marginalised groups have used the european court of justice to bring numerous claims against the british government for human rights abuses.	1_1.4.6.1.	The EU may in fact protect the citizens of the UK, through legal oversight, from the negative effects of poor policy making or implementation. Vulnerable and marginalised groups have used the European Court of Justice to bring numerous claims against the British Government for human rights abuses.	con	The EU has created many directives which encourage equal opportunities for ethnic minorities across Europe.
the eu has created many directives which encourage equal opportunities for ethnic minorities across europe.	1_1.4.6.1.1.	The EU has created many directives which encourage equal opportunities for ethnic minorities across Europe.	con	The EUs European Convention on Human Rights is a key legislation for preventing gender/ethnic discrimination, amongst many other similar areas.	The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union provides some Human Rights which would be lost if we leave the EU as proposed under the Repeal Bill.
the eus european convention on human rights is a key legislation for preventing gender/ethnic discrimination, amongst many other similar areas.	1_1.4.6.1.1.1.	The EUs European Convention on Human Rights is a key legislation for preventing gender/ethnic discrimination, amongst many other similar areas.	con	The ECHR is enforced by the Council of Europe, which is a completely different organisation to the EU.  The UK will still be signed up to the ECHR when it leaves the EU.
the echr is enforced by the council of europe, which is a completely different organisation to the eu.  the uk will still be signed up to the echr when it leaves the eu.	1_1.4.6.1.1.1.1.	The ECHR is enforced by the Council of Europe, which is a completely different organisation to the EU.  The UK will still be signed up to the ECHR when it leaves the EU.	pro	
the charter of fundamental rights of the european union provides some human rights which would be lost if we leave the eu as proposed under the repeal bill.	1_1.4.6.1.1.2.	The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union provides some Human Rights which would be lost if we leave the EU as proposed under the Repeal Bill.	con	
dysfunction is completely subjective. who's to say what is normal for a union of countries like those in europe. the fact that they exist and have 28 member states strongly suggests that they are not, "deviating from the norms of social behavior in a way regarded as bad."	1_1.4.7.	Dysfunction is completely subjective. Who's to say what is normal for a union of countries like those in Europe. The fact that they exist and have 28 member states strongly suggests that they are not, "deviating from the norms of social behavior in a way regarded as bad."	con	The UK has seriously influenced the way EU works. If the EU is dysfunctional, then it is partly UKs fault, and as such the UK ought to help develop functionality within the union rather than fleeing from its own mess.	If the structure of the EU leads to harmful externalities for its member states, this should be a relevant factor in the decision for the UK to remain or leave in the event of a hard Brexit.
the uk has seriously influenced the way eu works. if the eu is dysfunctional, then it is partly uks fault, and as such the uk ought to help develop functionality within the union rather than fleeing from its own mess.	1_1.4.7.1.	The UK has seriously influenced the way EU works. If the EU is dysfunctional, then it is partly UKs fault, and as such the UK ought to help develop functionality within the union rather than fleeing from its own mess.	con	
if the structure of the eu leads to harmful externalities for its member states, this should be a relevant factor in the decision for the uk to remain or leave in the event of a hard brexit.	1_1.4.7.2.	If the structure of the EU leads to harmful externalities for its member states, this should be a relevant factor in the decision for the UK to remain or leave in the event of a hard Brexit.	pro	
the uk would need to replace many of the eu's policies and institutions. these replacements will likely end up being more dysfunctional than the existing ones.	1_1.4.8.	The UK would need to replace many of the EU's policies and institutions. These replacements will likely end up being more dysfunctional than the existing ones.	con	The course and outcome of negotiations on Brexit on both sides suggest that the UK is more dysfunctional than the EU. Hence leaving the EU for this reason is illogical.	The Windrush scandal illustrates how incompetent the Home Office is.
the course and outcome of negotiations on brexit on both sides suggest that the uk is more dysfunctional than the eu. hence leaving the eu for this reason is illogical.	1_1.4.8.1.	The course and outcome of negotiations on Brexit on both sides suggest that the UK is more dysfunctional than the EU. Hence leaving the EU for this reason is illogical.	con	
the windrush scandal illustrates how incompetent the home office is.	1_1.4.8.2.	The Windrush scandal illustrates how incompetent the Home Office is.	con	
a hard brexit will hurt the scientific community in the uk.	1_1.5.	A hard Brexit will hurt the scientific community in the UK.	con	Brexit will increase International non-EU collaborations as the interventionist EU policies incentivising collaboration with other EU groups to the detriment of non-EU groups will dissipate.	A proportion of current EU-funded non-UK EU scientists who are working in the UK will have been hired over non-EU (and potentially UK) scientists for reasons of administrative ease, visa quotas, funding stipulations etc rather than on merit alone. Post-Brexit, non-EU individuals will not be structurally disadvantaged relative to EU individuals.  Hiring foreign scientists based solely on merit rather than citizenship will increase the quality of the scientific research carried out in the UK.	Polling from the Campaign for Science and Engineering in 2015 showed that over 90% of scientists felt that EU membership was a *major* benefit to science and research (pg. 1). Many leading scientists have publicly called for a second referendum or to abort Brexit entirely; almost none support hard exit.	Brexit will reduce the numbers of scientists in the UK.	Brexit will reduce EU collaborations.	Britain receives around 60% more money from the EU for research funding than it contributes to the EU for research (Royal Society pg. 12.	The UK can have better scientific research outside the EU as evidenced by the fact that many countries outside the EU have better scientific research programmes than many countries inside the EU.	The UK scientific community will no longer be beholden to burdensome EU regulations.	The impact of a hard Brexit on the scientific community will likely be cushioned by increased domestic spending on UK science.
brexit will increase international non-eu collaborations as the interventionist eu policies incentivising collaboration with other eu groups to the detriment of non-eu groups will dissipate.	1_1.5.1.	Brexit will increase International non-EU collaborations as the interventionist EU policies incentivising collaboration with other EU groups to the detriment of non-EU groups will dissipate.	pro	There are a series of structural reasons which make international collaborations within the EU effective. It is unlikely that collaborations outside the EU can replicate these conditions.	There is no indication that the EU reduces other international collaborations, as it already works with 170 countries around the world.	International collaboration is already the core of scientific research. There has been no evidence presented that Brexit can improve that in any way.	If Marmite was suddenly taxed heavily, you could expect sales of Vegemite to increase. That doesnt change the fact that people were CHOOSING marmite and are now having their preferences impacted by regulation. This claim does not attack the parent claim. Unless it also suggests that non EU collaborations are inherently more valuable. IE Vegemite is somehow superior to Marmite.	Many projects funded under the EU's Horizon 2020 fund require collaboration between at least 3 organisations from at least 3 EU (or associated) states, prioritizing intra-EU collaboration over the preferences of the researchers themselves.
there are a series of structural reasons which make international collaborations within the eu effective. it is unlikely that collaborations outside the eu can replicate these conditions.	1_1.5.1.1.	There are a series of structural reasons which make international collaborations within the EU effective. It is unlikely that collaborations outside the EU can replicate these conditions.	con	The centralised funding substantially reduces bureaucracy when it comes to arranging international collaborations.	The shared political interest in promoting EU science means that the best laboratory can be chosen to perform a particular task without preferentially selecting national funding for work in the country it is sourced from.	Centralised funding means that there is less risk in engaging in international collaborations, as there is no chance that your collaborator may lose, or fail to acquire, funding.
the centralised funding substantially reduces bureaucracy when it comes to arranging international collaborations.	1_1.5.1.1.1.	The centralised funding substantially reduces bureaucracy when it comes to arranging international collaborations.	con	
the shared political interest in promoting eu science means that the best laboratory can be chosen to perform a particular task without preferentially selecting national funding for work in the country it is sourced from.	1_1.5.1.1.2.	The shared political interest in promoting EU science means that the best laboratory can be chosen to perform a particular task without preferentially selecting national funding for work in the country it is sourced from.	con	
centralised funding means that there is less risk in engaging in international collaborations, as there is no chance that your collaborator may lose, or fail to acquire, funding.	1_1.5.1.1.3.	Centralised funding means that there is less risk in engaging in international collaborations, as there is no chance that your collaborator may lose, or fail to acquire, funding.	con	
there is no indication that the eu reduces other international collaborations, as it already works with 170 countries around the world.	1_1.5.1.2.	There is no indication that the EU reduces other international collaborations, as it already works with 170 countries around the world.	con	
international collaboration is already the core of scientific research. there has been no evidence presented that brexit can improve that in any way.	1_1.5.1.3.	International collaboration is already the core of scientific research. There has been no evidence presented that Brexit can improve that in any way.	con	
if marmite was suddenly taxed heavily, you could expect sales of vegemite to increase. that doesnt change the fact that people were choosing marmite and are now having their preferences impacted by regulation. this claim does not attack the parent claim. unless it also suggests that non eu collaborations are inherently more valuable. ie vegemite is somehow superior to marmite.	1_1.5.1.4.	If Marmite was suddenly taxed heavily, you could expect sales of Vegemite to increase. That doesnt change the fact that people were CHOOSING marmite and are now having their preferences impacted by regulation. This claim does not attack the parent claim. Unless it also suggests that non EU collaborations are inherently more valuable. IE Vegemite is somehow superior to Marmite.	con	
many projects funded under the eu's horizon 2020 fund require collaboration between at least 3 organisations from at least 3 eu (or associated) states, prioritizing intra-eu collaboration over the preferences of the researchers themselves.	1_1.5.1.5.	Many projects funded under the EU's Horizon 2020 fund require collaboration between at least 3 organisations from at least 3 EU (or associated) states, prioritizing intra-EU collaboration over the preferences of the researchers themselves.	pro	The Horizon fund says that "participants from all over the world ... can participate in most of the calls of Horizon 2020". It specifically supports and encourages international collaboration.	Whilst the UK is a net contributor overall, the amount it receives in research funding is greater than the proportion of its funding that goes to research from contributions the EU pot	Even if the UK withdrew £x for research and put it directly in its own pot for research (as opposed to funding those NHS budget claims), that funding would be subject to its own criteria (maybe even to support projects that worked with EU states in order to maintain the research links post-brexit).	Horizon 2020 is not the only research grant available.	Horizon 2020 serves as an example of a research avenue that the UK might not be able to access in the future.
the horizon fund says that "participants from all over the world ... can participate in most of the calls of horizon 2020". it specifically supports and encourages international collaboration.	1_1.5.1.5.1.	The Horizon fund says that "participants from all over the world ... can participate in most of the calls of Horizon 2020". It specifically supports and encourages international collaboration.	con	
whilst the uk is a net contributor overall, the amount it receives in research funding is greater than the proportion of its funding that goes to research from contributions the eu pot	1_1.5.1.5.2.	Whilst the UK is a net contributor overall, the amount it receives in research funding is greater than the proportion of its funding that goes to research from contributions the EU pot	con	
even if the uk withdrew £x for research and put it directly in its own pot for research (as opposed to funding those nhs budget claims), that funding would be subject to its own criteria (maybe even to support projects that worked with eu states in order to maintain the research links post-brexit).	1_1.5.1.5.3.	Even if the UK withdrew £x for research and put it directly in its own pot for research (as opposed to funding those NHS budget claims), that funding would be subject to its own criteria (maybe even to support projects that worked with EU states in order to maintain the research links post-brexit).	con	
horizon 2020 is not the only research grant available.	1_1.5.1.5.4.	Horizon 2020 is not the only research grant available.	con	
horizon 2020 serves as an example of a research avenue that the uk might not be able to access in the future.	1_1.5.1.5.5.	Horizon 2020 serves as an example of a research avenue that the UK might not be able to access in the future.	con	Some UK researchers report that they have already been 'frozen out' of making grant applications to Horizon 2020, the EU's Research and Innovation programme.
some uk researchers report that they have already been 'frozen out' of making grant applications to horizon 2020, the eu's research and innovation programme.	1_1.5.1.5.5.1.	Some UK researchers report that they have already been 'frozen out' of making grant applications to Horizon 2020, the EU's Research and Innovation programme.	con	
a proportion of current eu-funded non-uk eu scientists who are working in the uk will have been hired over non-eu (and potentially uk) scientists for reasons of administrative ease, visa quotas, funding stipulations etc rather than on merit alone. post-brexit, non-eu individuals will not be structurally disadvantaged relative to eu individuals.  hiring foreign scientists based solely on merit rather than citizenship will increase the quality of the scientific research carried out in the uk.	1_1.5.2.	A proportion of current EU-funded non-UK EU scientists who are working in the UK will have been hired over non-EU (and potentially UK) scientists for reasons of administrative ease, visa quotas, funding stipulations etc rather than on merit alone. Post-Brexit, non-EU individuals will not be structurally disadvantaged relative to EU individuals.  Hiring foreign scientists based solely on merit rather than citizenship will increase the quality of the scientific research carried out in the UK.	pro	Money is an issue, however. A significant portion of the funding which is required for those jobs comes from EU sources. The figures vary from sector to sector, but it is roughly 15% in general funding, and according to Universities UK, overall EU research funding generated over 19,000 full-time-equivalent jobs in the UK in 2014/2015 (p4). Thus, leaving the EU might mean prioritising non-EU hires in theory, but the money to hire them would be reduced.	The administrative cost of bringing in non-EU citizens will not improve as a result of a hard Brexit. However it will be more costly to bring in EU scientists, meaning that overall quality could be hurt.
money is an issue, however. a significant portion of the funding which is required for those jobs comes from eu sources. the figures vary from sector to sector, but it is roughly 15% in general funding, and according to universities uk, overall eu research funding generated over 19,000 full-time-equivalent jobs in the uk in 2014/2015 (p4). thus, leaving the eu might mean prioritising non-eu hires in theory, but the money to hire them would be reduced.	1_1.5.2.1.	Money is an issue, however. A significant portion of the funding which is required for those jobs comes from EU sources. The figures vary from sector to sector, but it is roughly 15% in general funding, and according to Universities UK, overall EU research funding generated over 19,000 full-time-equivalent jobs in the UK in 2014/2015 (p4). Thus, leaving the EU might mean prioritising non-EU hires in theory, but the money to hire them would be reduced.	con	No funding is guaranteed, and the EU could equally have withdrawn it in the future.  As the UK is a net payer into the EU, this funding is really UK money, anyway.	Quantity does not mean quality when it comes to scientific research.
no funding is guaranteed, and the eu could equally have withdrawn it in the future.  as the uk is a net payer into the eu, this funding is really uk money, anyway.	1_1.5.2.1.1.	No funding is guaranteed, and the EU could equally have withdrawn it in the future.  As the UK is a net payer into the EU, this funding is really UK money, anyway.	pro	
quantity does not mean quality when it comes to scientific research.	1_1.5.2.1.2.	Quantity does not mean quality when it comes to scientific research.	pro	
the administrative cost of bringing in non-eu citizens will not improve as a result of a hard brexit. however it will be more costly to bring in eu scientists, meaning that overall quality could be hurt.	1_1.5.2.2.	The administrative cost of bringing in non-EU citizens will not improve as a result of a hard Brexit. However it will be more costly to bring in EU scientists, meaning that overall quality could be hurt.	con	
polling from the campaign for science and engineering in 2015 showed that over 90% of scientists felt that eu membership was a *major* benefit to science and research (pg. 1). many leading scientists have publicly called for a second referendum or to abort brexit entirely; almost none support hard exit.	1_1.5.3.	Polling from the Campaign for Science and Engineering in 2015 showed that over 90% of scientists felt that EU membership was a *major* benefit to science and research (pg. 1). Many leading scientists have publicly called for a second referendum or to abort Brexit entirely; almost none support hard exit.	con	97% of UK scientists believe that a hard Brexit would have negative outcomes for science in the UK.
97% of uk scientists believe that a hard brexit would have negative outcomes for science in the uk.	1_1.5.3.1.	97% of UK scientists believe that a hard Brexit would have negative outcomes for science in the UK.	con	The scientists in this survey were all staff from the biomedical research lab, The Francis Crick Institute. As such, this finding may not be representative of all UK scientists who work across a plethora of different fields.	Scientists are well-placed to assess the impact of a hard Brexit on the scientific community because they have first-hand experience of it.
the scientists in this survey were all staff from the biomedical research lab, the francis crick institute. as such, this finding may not be representative of all uk scientists who work across a plethora of different fields.	1_1.5.3.1.1.	The scientists in this survey were all staff from the biomedical research lab, The Francis Crick Institute. As such, this finding may not be representative of all UK scientists who work across a plethora of different fields.	pro	
scientists are well-placed to assess the impact of a hard brexit on the scientific community because they have first-hand experience of it.	1_1.5.3.1.2.	Scientists are well-placed to assess the impact of a hard Brexit on the scientific community because they have first-hand experience of it.	con	
brexit will reduce the numbers of scientists in the uk.	1_1.5.4.	Brexit will reduce the numbers of scientists in the UK.	con	Ending free movement will restrict the ability of scientists to work across international boundaries and reduce the pool of scientists from which UK institutions can be drawn.	More than half of all scientists reported that Brexit had increased the likelihood of them leaving. This was even higher for non-UK EU citizens, at over three quarters.	31,000 academics, or about 16% of the university-based workforce, are non-UK EU citizens. A hard Brexit could jeopardise their residency rights.	Applications to UK-based scientific research programs by foreign nationals have dramatically dropped(Every year Geim receives a steady flow of applications from abroad seeking to join the Marie Curie research program in Manchester. In 2017 he has received no applications at all.) since the referendum.	In September 2019, PM Boris Johnson announced that he would create a fast-track visa system to attract foreign scientists to UK institutions.
ending free movement will restrict the ability of scientists to work across international boundaries and reduce the pool of scientists from which uk institutions can be drawn.	1_1.5.4.1.	Ending free movement will restrict the ability of scientists to work across international boundaries and reduce the pool of scientists from which UK institutions can be drawn.	con	Most immigration systems, such as Australia, allow skilled workers like scientists to travel quite freely.	In September 2019, PM Boris Johnson announced that he would create a fast-track visa system to attract foreign scientists to UK institutions.
most immigration systems, such as australia, allow skilled workers like scientists to travel quite freely.	1_1.5.4.1.1.	Most immigration systems, such as Australia, allow skilled workers like scientists to travel quite freely.	pro	
in september 2019, pm boris johnson announced that he would create a fast-track visa system to attract foreign scientists to uk institutions.	1_1.5.4.1.2.	In September 2019, PM Boris Johnson announced that he would create a fast-track visa system to attract foreign scientists to UK institutions.	pro	Foreign scientists are unlikely to be persuaded to come to the UK just because the fast-track visa system makes it easier to get there because there remain deeper issues faced by the scientific community upon arrival.
foreign scientists are unlikely to be persuaded to come to the uk just because the fast-track visa system makes it easier to get there because there remain deeper issues faced by the scientific community upon arrival.	1_1.5.4.1.2.1.	Foreign scientists are unlikely to be persuaded to come to the UK just because the fast-track visa system makes it easier to get there because there remain deeper issues faced by the scientific community upon arrival.	con	
more than half of all scientists reported that brexit had increased the likelihood of them leaving. this was even higher for non-uk eu citizens, at over three quarters.	1_1.5.4.2.	More than half of all scientists reported that Brexit had increased the likelihood of them leaving. This was even higher for non-UK EU citizens, at over three quarters.	con	"More likely" does not mean "likely" or indicate how much more likely.	It is common for people to overestimate the impact that political votes will have on their future actions.
"more likely" does not mean "likely" or indicate how much more likely.	1_1.5.4.2.1.	"More likely" does not mean "likely" or indicate how much more likely.	pro	
it is common for people to overestimate the impact that political votes will have on their future actions.	1_1.5.4.2.2.	It is common for people to overestimate the impact that political votes will have on their future actions.	pro	
31,000 academics, or about 16% of the university-based workforce, are non-uk eu citizens. a hard brexit could jeopardise their residency rights.	1_1.5.4.3.	31,000 academics, or about 16% of the university-based workforce, are non-UK EU citizens. A hard Brexit could jeopardise their residency rights.	con	A proportion of current EU-funded non-UK EU scientists who are working in the UK will have been hired over non-EU (and potentially UK) scientists for reasons of administrative ease, visa quotas, funding stipulations etc rather than on merit alone. Post-Brexit, non-EU individuals will not be structurally disadvantaged relative to EU individuals.  Hiring foreign scientists based solely on merit rather than citizenship will increase the quality of the scientific research carried out in the UK.	Many academic staff currently do not earn enough money to qualify for a tier 2 visa for skilled workers.
many academic staff currently do not earn enough money to qualify for a tier 2 visa for skilled workers.	1_1.5.4.3.2.	Many academic staff currently do not earn enough money to qualify for a tier 2 visa for skilled workers.	con	As a sovereign country the UK can adjust its visa system to meet its needs.
as a sovereign country the uk can adjust its visa system to meet its needs.	1_1.5.4.3.2.1.	As a sovereign country the UK can adjust its visa system to meet its needs.	pro	
applications to uk-based scientific research programs by foreign nationals have dramatically dropped(every year geim receives a steady flow of applications from abroad seeking to join the marie curie research program in manchester. in 2017 he has received no applications at all.) since the referendum.	1_1.5.4.4.	Applications to UK-based scientific research programs by foreign nationals have dramatically dropped(Every year Geim receives a steady flow of applications from abroad seeking to join the Marie Curie research program in Manchester. In 2017 he has received no applications at all.) since the referendum.	con	
brexit will reduce eu collaborations.	1_1.5.5.	Brexit will reduce EU collaborations.	con	Brexit will increase International non-EU collaborations as the interventionist EU policies incentivising collaboration with other EU groups to the detriment of non-EU groups will dissipate.	Some notable collaborations, such as CERN, are not contingent upon EU membership.	Outside the European Union, Britain will no longer host the European Medicines Agency, which evaluates medicinal products throughout the EU and has 890 employees. Instead the Agency and those scientists will relocate to Amsterdam.	Non-EU scientists from Israel and Switzerland have been part of the European Research Council. There is no reason Britain's scientists cannot do the same after Brexit.	The UK won research grants valued at €1.7 billion during the last funding period of the European Research Council. By contrast, Germany won grants valued at €1.1 billion.	Between 2015 and 2019, the amount of EU science fellows choosing UK universities dropped from 33% to 22%. This trend is likely to continue under a hard Brexit.	Some UK researchers report that they have already been 'frozen out' of making grant applications to Horizon 2020, the EU's Research and Innovation programme.
some notable collaborations, such as cern, are not contingent upon eu membership.	1_1.5.5.2.	Some notable collaborations, such as CERN, are not contingent upon EU membership.	pro	
outside the european union, britain will no longer host the european medicines agency, which evaluates medicinal products throughout the eu and has 890 employees. instead the agency and those scientists will relocate to amsterdam.	1_1.5.5.3.	Outside the European Union, Britain will no longer host the European Medicines Agency, which evaluates medicinal products throughout the EU and has 890 employees. Instead the Agency and those scientists will relocate to Amsterdam.	con	This will not affect scientific research in the UK, and so only affects an extremely small proportion of the scientific community.
this will not affect scientific research in the uk, and so only affects an extremely small proportion of the scientific community.	1_1.5.5.3.1.	This will not affect scientific research in the UK, and so only affects an extremely small proportion of the scientific community.	pro	
non-eu scientists from israel and switzerland have been part of the european research council. there is no reason britain's scientists cannot do the same after brexit.	1_1.5.5.4.	Non-EU scientists from Israel and Switzerland have been part of the European Research Council. There is no reason Britain's scientists cannot do the same after Brexit.	pro	Israel and Switzerland win more funding per capita than UK researchers, and have similar success rates when attempting to obtain grants.	These associate members attend Research Council meetings in an observer capacity only, and consequently their abilities to shape research policy are limited.
israel and switzerland win more funding per capita than uk researchers, and have similar success rates when attempting to obtain grants.	1_1.5.5.4.1.	Israel and Switzerland win more funding per capita than UK researchers, and have similar success rates when attempting to obtain grants.	pro	Switzerland (2.8 percent) and Israel (4.4 percent) spend proportionally more of their GDP on R&D than Britain (1.7 percent), making it easier for them to obtain research grants from the EU. It is unlikely that the UK will match them in spending anytime soon, given the economic consequences of Brexit.
switzerland (2.8 percent) and israel (4.4 percent) spend proportionally more of their gdp on r&d than britain (1.7 percent), making it easier for them to obtain research grants from the eu. it is unlikely that the uk will match them in spending anytime soon, given the economic consequences of brexit.	1_1.5.5.4.1.1.	Switzerland (2.8 percent) and Israel (4.4 percent) spend proportionally more of their GDP on R&D than Britain (1.7 percent), making it easier for them to obtain research grants from the EU. It is unlikely that the UK will match them in spending anytime soon, given the economic consequences of Brexit.	con	
these associate members attend research council meetings in an observer capacity only, and consequently their abilities to shape research policy are limited.	1_1.5.5.4.2.	These associate members attend Research Council meetings in an observer capacity only, and consequently their abilities to shape research policy are limited.	con	
the uk won research grants valued at €1.7 billion during the last funding period of the european research council. by contrast, germany won grants valued at €1.1 billion.	1_1.5.5.5.	The UK won research grants valued at €1.7 billion during the last funding period of the European Research Council. By contrast, Germany won grants valued at €1.1 billion.	con	The ERC is not the only source of funding for UK scientific research, and so even if these funds are lost (which is not necessarily the case as other non-EU countries receive ERC funds) they could be compensated for through other sources.
the erc is not the only source of funding for uk scientific research, and so even if these funds are lost (which is not necessarily the case as other non-eu countries receive erc funds) they could be compensated for through other sources.	1_1.5.5.5.1.	The ERC is not the only source of funding for UK scientific research, and so even if these funds are lost (which is not necessarily the case as other non-EU countries receive ERC funds) they could be compensated for through other sources.	pro	Israel and Switzerland win more funding per capita than UK researchers, and have similar success rates when attempting to obtain grants.
between 2015 and 2019, the amount of eu science fellows choosing uk universities dropped from 33% to 22%. this trend is likely to continue under a hard brexit.	1_1.5.5.6.	Between 2015 and 2019, the amount of EU science fellows choosing UK universities dropped from 33% to 22%. This trend is likely to continue under a hard Brexit.	con	
britain receives around 60% more money from the eu for research funding than it contributes to the eu for research (royal society pg. 12.	1_1.5.6.	Britain receives around 60% more money from the EU for research funding than it contributes to the EU for research (Royal Society pg. 12.	con	It is unlikely that the loss of EU control over the funding of British science will cause any harm. UK universities were good at science before the UK joined the EU, and will likely continue to remain so.	Since the UK is a net contributor to the EU to the tune of £8.9bn, so any EU money science programs lose can be replaced by the UK government funding them directly.
it is unlikely that the loss of eu control over the funding of british science will cause any harm. uk universities were good at science before the uk joined the eu, and will likely continue to remain so.	1_1.5.6.1.	It is unlikely that the loss of EU control over the funding of British science will cause any harm. UK universities were good at science before the UK joined the EU, and will likely continue to remain so.	pro	
since the uk is a net contributor to the eu to the tune of £8.9bn, so any eu money science programs lose can be replaced by the uk government funding them directly.	1_1.5.6.2.	Since the UK is a net contributor to the EU to the tune of £8.9bn, so any EU money science programs lose can be replaced by the UK government funding them directly.	pro	
the uk can have better scientific research outside the eu as evidenced by the fact that many countries outside the eu have better scientific research programmes than many countries inside the eu.	1_1.5.7.	The UK can have better scientific research outside the EU as evidenced by the fact that many countries outside the EU have better scientific research programmes than many countries inside the EU.	pro	Research in EU-member states has developed massively thanks to the presence of EU-funded projects and its supra-national institutes (such as EMBL. Many of these have premises in UK. Brexit will change this mainly for UK, as researchers that are working in the aforementioned projects will relocate to EU-member states.	Causation/Correlation Fallacy: The fact that other countries have better X (scientific research programs) than countries with characteristic Y (membership within the European Union) does not mean that success in X (scientific research programs) is causally related to Y (membership within the European Union) in any way.	Nations such as Australia and the United States currently recruit more international researchers than Britain, which shows that membership in a supranational organization is not a prerequisite for success in this regard.
research in eu-member states has developed massively thanks to the presence of eu-funded projects and its supra-national institutes (such as embl. many of these have premises in uk. brexit will change this mainly for uk, as researchers that are working in the aforementioned projects will relocate to eu-member states.	1_1.5.7.1.	Research in EU-member states has developed massively thanks to the presence of EU-funded projects and its supra-national institutes (such as EMBL. Many of these have premises in UK. Brexit will change this mainly for UK, as researchers that are working in the aforementioned projects will relocate to EU-member states.	con	
causation/correlation fallacy: the fact that other countries have better x (scientific research programs) than countries with characteristic y (membership within the european union) does not mean that success in x (scientific research programs) is causally related to y (membership within the european union) in any way.	1_1.5.7.2.	Causation/Correlation Fallacy: The fact that other countries have better X (scientific research programs) than countries with characteristic Y (membership within the European Union) does not mean that success in X (scientific research programs) is causally related to Y (membership within the European Union) in any way.	con	
nations such as australia and the united states currently recruit more international researchers than britain, which shows that membership in a supranational organization is not a prerequisite for success in this regard.	1_1.5.7.3.	Nations such as Australia and the United States currently recruit more international researchers than Britain, which shows that membership in a supranational organization is not a prerequisite for success in this regard.	pro	False Equivalency: Australia and the United States are not Britain. This claim assumes that being removed from the EU will make Britain like the United States or Australia. There is no rational reason to make that assumption.
false equivalency: australia and the united states are not britain. this claim assumes that being removed from the eu will make britain like the united states or australia. there is no rational reason to make that assumption.	1_1.5.7.3.1.	False Equivalency: Australia and the United States are not Britain. This claim assumes that being removed from the EU will make Britain like the United States or Australia. There is no rational reason to make that assumption.	con	
the uk scientific community will no longer be beholden to burdensome eu regulations.	1_1.5.8.	The UK scientific community will no longer be beholden to burdensome EU regulations.	pro	There are relatively few EU regulations on research that the UK would not also implement.	At present, EU state aid regulations limit the ability of UK funding bodies to support transnational research from universities into start up companies. Leaving the EU will remove this problem.	EU regulations ensure research is undertaken in a safe, sustainable, ethical and accountable way.	For example, the 'burdensome' EU regulations that prevent pesticides that devastate biodiversity from being used freely across Europe, thereby protecting the environmental resources on which scientific research (and a lot more) depends. It's policies like these, that benefit everyone (except the likes of Monsanto), that the British government seeks to block
there are relatively few eu regulations on research that the uk would not also implement.	1_1.5.8.1.	There are relatively few EU regulations on research that the UK would not also implement.	con	Development of new biological weapons, heavily restricted under EU law, is unlikely given that the UK was the proposer of the original Biological Weapons Convention.	Additional EU law governing animal experimentation was pushed heavily by the UK. UK law was already strict, but a central aim of the revised legislation was to raise standards of oversight and animal use in other Member States.	The UK has been far more stringent in its application of the Clinical Trials Directive than other EU members.
development of new biological weapons, heavily restricted under eu law, is unlikely given that the uk was the proposer of the original biological weapons convention.	1_1.5.8.1.1.	Development of new biological weapons, heavily restricted under EU law, is unlikely given that the UK was the proposer of the original Biological Weapons Convention.	con	
additional eu law governing animal experimentation was pushed heavily by the uk. uk law was already strict, but a central aim of the revised legislation was to raise standards of oversight and animal use in other member states.	1_1.5.8.1.2.	Additional EU law governing animal experimentation was pushed heavily by the UK. UK law was already strict, but a central aim of the revised legislation was to raise standards of oversight and animal use in other Member States.	con	
the uk has been far more stringent in its application of the clinical trials directive than other eu members.	1_1.5.8.1.3.	The UK has been far more stringent in its application of the Clinical Trials Directive than other EU members.	con	
at present, eu state aid regulations limit the ability of uk funding bodies to support transnational research from universities into start up companies. leaving the eu will remove this problem.	1_1.5.8.2.	At present, EU state aid regulations limit the ability of UK funding bodies to support transnational research from universities into start up companies. Leaving the EU will remove this problem.	pro	
eu regulations ensure research is undertaken in a safe, sustainable, ethical and accountable way.	1_1.5.8.3.	EU regulations ensure research is undertaken in a safe, sustainable, ethical and accountable way.	con	
for example, the 'burdensome' eu regulations that prevent pesticides that devastate biodiversity from being used freely across europe, thereby protecting the environmental resources on which scientific research (and a lot more) depends. it's policies like these, that benefit everyone (except the likes of monsanto), that the british government seeks to block	1_1.5.8.4.	For example, the 'burdensome' EU regulations that prevent pesticides that devastate biodiversity from being used freely across Europe, thereby protecting the environmental resources on which scientific research (and a lot more) depends. It's policies like these, that benefit everyone (except the likes of Monsanto), that the British government seeks to block	con	
the impact of a hard brexit on the scientific community will likely be cushioned by increased domestic spending on uk science.	1_1.5.9.	The impact of a hard Brexit on the scientific community will likely be cushioned by increased domestic spending on UK science.	pro	Since the UK is a net contributor to the EU to the tune of £8.9bn, so any EU money science programs lose can be replaced by the UK government funding them directly.	The UK government has committed to investing 2.4% of GDP in the Research & Development (R&D) sector by 2027. This is significantly more than the current investment of 1.7%.	By 2021, the UK government aims to boost investment in R&D by £7 billion, representing the largest ever increase in public funding of R&D by any UK government (Industrial Strategy, p. 67.	In 2016, Chancellor Philip Hammond announced that the UK Treasury would replace EU funds for scientists.
the uk government has committed to investing 2.4% of gdp in the research & development (r&d) sector by 2027. this is significantly more than the current investment of 1.7%.	1_1.5.9.2.	The UK government has committed to investing 2.4% of GDP in the Research & Development (R&D) sector by 2027. This is significantly more than the current investment of 1.7%.	pro	The current government's spending of just 1.7% of GDP on R&D is already significantly less than the EU recommendation of 2.07%. Therefore, the UK government has a history of falling short on R&D investment, suggesting that its commitment to 2.4% by 2027 may not be met.	A lot can politically and economically change before 2027 so this commitment is not guaranteed.
the current government's spending of just 1.7% of gdp on r&d is already significantly less than the eu recommendation of 2.07%. therefore, the uk government has a history of falling short on r&d investment, suggesting that its commitment to 2.4% by 2027 may not be met.	1_1.5.9.2.1.	The current government's spending of just 1.7% of GDP on R&D is already significantly less than the EU recommendation of 2.07%. Therefore, the UK government has a history of falling short on R&D investment, suggesting that its commitment to 2.4% by 2027 may not be met.	con	
a lot can politically and economically change before 2027 so this commitment is not guaranteed.	1_1.5.9.2.2.	A lot can politically and economically change before 2027 so this commitment is not guaranteed.	con	
by 2021, the uk government aims to boost investment in r&d by £7 billion, representing the largest ever increase in public funding of r&d by any uk government (industrial strategy, p. 67.	1_1.5.9.3.	By 2021, the UK government aims to boost investment in R&D by £7 billion, representing the largest ever increase in public funding of R&D by any UK government (Industrial Strategy, p. 67.	pro	
in 2016, chancellor philip hammond announced that the uk treasury would replace eu funds for scientists.	1_1.5.9.4.	In 2016, Chancellor Philip Hammond announced that the UK Treasury would replace EU funds for scientists.	pro	
the uk should be able to control and limit its immigration policy as it sees fit.	1_1.6.	The UK should be able to control and limit its immigration policy as it sees fit.	pro	The UK can sufficiently control immigration while remaining in the EU.	Consistent polling has shown that a sizable majority believe the UK's immigration levels are too high.	The possibility that Turkey, an EU candidate country that borders war-torn Syria and has a large population, may join the EU is a major concern to many British Eurosceptics.	The EU is not a third party imposing an immigration policy on the UK. As a member of the EU, the UK was involved in the drafting of, and signed up to, the Maastricht Treaty which introduced the notion of EU citizenship, and the right of any citizen to reside anywhere within the Union. The UK was exercising its right to decide its immigration policy by introducing free movement (along with its fellow EU-members).	The EU is blamed for uncontrolled immigration, yet the EU does have laws that do this that the UK has failed to enact.	The UK has full control over the flow of non-EU migrants, which accounts for over 80% of the UK's recent immigrant intake. A failure to control controllable immigration gives a strong indication that EU immigration would not be significantly reduced by Brexit.	This would allow the UK to implement a merit-based immigration policy which, due to strict policing and mandatory quotas, would be impossible under EU regulations.	By leaving the EU, the UK has to sign free trade deals with other nations, many of whom may require increased freedom of movement of people, which could potentially offset any decreased immigration from the EU.	An open immigration policy with the EU puts the UK's economy at risk.	The Brexit campaign resulted in a significant increase of expressions of xenophobia and racism, which may make it harder for the UK to attract foreign workers.
the uk can sufficiently control immigration while remaining in the eu.	1_1.6.1.	The UK can sufficiently control immigration while remaining in the EU.	con	EU regulations already allow countries to reject people with a criminal record.	Member States, like the UK, can restrict entry and residence of EU citizens on grounds of public policy or public security (art 27 and further CD. This is understood as 'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society'. Although to be interpreted restrictively, based on the personal conduct of the individual, it is to be read in light of the national needs of the Member State. 	The number of Romanians and Bulgarians living in the UK has increased by over 80% since 2014 to over 400,000 as a result of EU open border immigration laws. This is unprecedented, was not anticipated (even Nigel farage underestimated the numbers that would come) and would not have happened had the UK had full control of immigration.	The UK already has the ability to control immigration. It has chosen not to. The fact that there is no enforcement of these rules in the UK is not the fault of of the EU.	EU citizens only have the right to reside in the UK for longer than 3 months if they work, or if they are self-sufficient (including dependents), students, or accompanying family members - Article 7 of the Citizenship Directive.	The majority of immigration to the UK comes from non-EU countries, which the UK can already control.	It is not enough for the UK to maintain partial control. These rules significantly infringe on the UK's ability to regulate immigration as it sees fit, which de-prioritizes the national interest.
eu regulations already allow countries to reject people with a criminal record.	1_1.6.1.1.	EU regulations already allow countries to reject people with a criminal record.	con	According to the same source, the law states “previous criminal convictions shall not in themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures” (i.e., for refusing entry to such a person), adding extra standards for evaluating criminals on a case-by-case basis.	Convicted criminals can be excluded on a case-by-case basis if they present “a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society”.
according to the same source, the law states “previous criminal convictions shall not in themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures” (i.e., for refusing entry to such a person), adding extra standards for evaluating criminals on a case-by-case basis.	1_1.6.1.1.1.	According to the same source, the law states “previous criminal convictions shall not in themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures” (i.e., for refusing entry to such a person), adding extra standards for evaluating criminals on a case-by-case basis.	pro	This is a positive thing, as it gives choice and control to UK border staff. Either alternative (no ability to stop criminals / no ability to accept criminals) would be worse for the UK than the current situation: getting to decide itself.
this is a positive thing, as it gives choice and control to uk border staff. either alternative (no ability to stop criminals / no ability to accept criminals) would be worse for the uk than the current situation: getting to decide itself.	1_1.6.1.1.1.1.	This is a positive thing, as it gives choice and control to UK border staff. Either alternative (no ability to stop criminals / no ability to accept criminals) would be worse for the UK than the current situation: getting to decide itself.	con	
convicted criminals can be excluded on a case-by-case basis if they present “a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society”.	1_1.6.1.1.2.	Convicted criminals can be excluded on a case-by-case basis if they present “a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society”.	con	
member states, like the uk, can restrict entry and residence of eu citizens on grounds of public policy or public security (art 27 and further cd. this is understood as 'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society'. although to be interpreted restrictively, based on the personal conduct of the individual, it is to be read in light of the national needs of the member state. 	1_1.6.1.2.	Member States, like the UK, can restrict entry and residence of EU citizens on grounds of public policy or public security (art 27 and further CD. This is understood as 'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society'. Although to be interpreted restrictively, based on the personal conduct of the individual, it is to be read in light of the national needs of the Member State. 	con	
the number of romanians and bulgarians living in the uk has increased by over 80% since 2014 to over 400,000 as a result of eu open border immigration laws. this is unprecedented, was not anticipated (even nigel farage underestimated the numbers that would come) and would not have happened had the uk had full control of immigration.	1_1.6.1.3.	The number of Romanians and Bulgarians living in the UK has increased by over 80% since 2014 to over 400,000 as a result of EU open border immigration laws. This is unprecedented, was not anticipated (even Nigel farage underestimated the numbers that would come) and would not have happened had the UK had full control of immigration.	pro	It was consecutive UK governments who decided not to restrict residency rights without proof of sustainable work of EU immigrants. The EU is not responsible for the UK lack of regulations. Immigrants who work and pay taxes however contribute hugely to the UK economy.
it was consecutive uk governments who decided not to restrict residency rights without proof of sustainable work of eu immigrants. the eu is not responsible for the uk lack of regulations. immigrants who work and pay taxes however contribute hugely to the uk economy.	1_1.6.1.3.1.	It was consecutive UK governments who decided not to restrict residency rights without proof of sustainable work of EU immigrants. The EU is not responsible for the UK lack of regulations. Immigrants who work and pay taxes however contribute hugely to the UK economy.	con	
the uk already has the ability to control immigration. it has chosen not to. the fact that there is no enforcement of these rules in the uk is not the fault of of the eu.	1_1.6.1.4.	The UK already has the ability to control immigration. It has chosen not to. The fact that there is no enforcement of these rules in the UK is not the fault of of the EU.	con	Other EU nations like Austria currently restrict EU migrants using existing EU laws. Theresa May merely chose not to do so when she was Home Secretary. Brexit was never necessary to restrict migration from the EU.	The UK government has failed to implement the measures allowed by the EU, when it could have. Brexit will enable it to continue to fail to do so. Farage Admits UK could have controlled EU immigration.	The UK previously chose to let in higher numbers of EU migrants than they had to, as the result of their own immigration policy.	The UK, Ireland and Denmark have opt-outs from parts of EU justice and home affairs (JHA) policy. They could use those opt-outs to avoid the European Agenda on Migrations mandatory burden-sharing, if they wanted to.	The only instance in which the UK can deny entry to an EU citizen is on security grounds, such as when the person who tries to enter is a criminal. Other than that, the UK has absolutely no control over the people that seek entry to the UK. And as for the people who want to stay in the UK, but they don't satisfy the conditions pointed out in Article 7 of the Free Movement Directive, they can still enter if they have a family member residing in the UK that satisfies these conditions.
other eu nations like austria currently restrict eu migrants using existing eu laws. theresa may merely chose not to do so when she was home secretary. brexit was never necessary to restrict migration from the eu.	1_1.6.1.4.1.	Other EU nations like Austria currently restrict EU migrants using existing EU laws. Theresa May merely chose not to do so when she was Home Secretary. Brexit was never necessary to restrict migration from the EU.	con	Austria's laws only restrict EU migrants that aren't working/studying/able to support themselves. The vast majority of EU migrants to the UK are employed, and so these laws would do next to nothing to restrict migration from the EU. Therefore Brexit is absolutely necessary to restrict EU migration.
austria's laws only restrict eu migrants that aren't working/studying/able to support themselves. the vast majority of eu migrants to the uk are employed, and so these laws would do next to nothing to restrict migration from the eu. therefore brexit is absolutely necessary to restrict eu migration.	1_1.6.1.4.1.1.	Austria's laws only restrict EU migrants that aren't working/studying/able to support themselves. The vast majority of EU migrants to the UK are employed, and so these laws would do next to nothing to restrict migration from the EU. Therefore Brexit is absolutely necessary to restrict EU migration.	pro	There is no consensus between Leave voters as to what controls on immigration should be put in place. Some insist that immigration was never the issue, some want only to restrict the unemployed being a burden on the country, others go much further insisting that we have "No room". If migrants are working then they are contributing to British society and paying towards new schools, housing, the NHS, etc.
there is no consensus between leave voters as to what controls on immigration should be put in place. some insist that immigration was never the issue, some want only to restrict the unemployed being a burden on the country, others go much further insisting that we have "no room". if migrants are working then they are contributing to british society and paying towards new schools, housing, the nhs, etc.	1_1.6.1.4.1.1.1.	There is no consensus between Leave voters as to what controls on immigration should be put in place. Some insist that immigration was never the issue, some want only to restrict the unemployed being a burden on the country, others go much further insisting that we have "No room". If migrants are working then they are contributing to British society and paying towards new schools, housing, the NHS, etc.	con	
the uk government has failed to implement the measures allowed by the eu, when it could have. brexit will enable it to continue to fail to do so. farage admits uk could have controlled eu immigration.	1_1.6.1.4.2.	The UK government has failed to implement the measures allowed by the EU, when it could have. Brexit will enable it to continue to fail to do so. Farage Admits UK could have controlled EU immigration.	con	
the uk previously chose to let in higher numbers of eu migrants than they had to, as the result of their own immigration policy.	1_1.6.1.4.3.	The UK previously chose to let in higher numbers of EU migrants than they had to, as the result of their own immigration policy.	con	The UK was one of only three EU member states, alongside Sweden and Ireland, to open its labour market to the new 2004 Eastern European EU citizens (EU10, including the A8) immediately.	Tony Blair made a 2004 deal with Romanian prime minister Adrian Nastase accepting more migrants in order to manipulate Asylum application figures to make good on earlier promises, rather than trying to resolve the problem properly.	Opening borders to eastern european migrants was in keeping with Labours 1997–2010 immigration policies, which had always focused on expanding immigration and removing restrictions, to encourage the economic benefits of increased migration.	EU rules allow the UK to require migrants to become self-sufficient within 3 months of arriving (excluding students and families), but the UK does not register migrants as they arrive and as such has no way of knowing how long they have been in the UK.
the uk was one of only three eu member states, alongside sweden and ireland, to open its labour market to the new 2004 eastern european eu citizens (eu10, including the a8) immediately.	1_1.6.1.4.3.1.	The UK was one of only three EU member states, alongside Sweden and Ireland, to open its labour market to the new 2004 Eastern European EU citizens (EU10, including the A8) immediately.	con	EU rules allowed existing member states 2+3+2 years of their own restrictions, and to suspend free movement of workers if they experienced or anticipated serious disturbances to their labour market.
eu rules allowed existing member states 2+3+2 years of their own restrictions, and to suspend free movement of workers if they experienced or anticipated serious disturbances to their labour market.	1_1.6.1.4.3.1.1.	EU rules allowed existing member states 2+3+2 years of their own restrictions, and to suspend free movement of workers if they experienced or anticipated serious disturbances to their labour market.	con	
tony blair made a 2004 deal with romanian prime minister adrian nastase accepting more migrants in order to manipulate asylum application figures to make good on earlier promises, rather than trying to resolve the problem properly.	1_1.6.1.4.3.2.	Tony Blair made a 2004 deal with Romanian prime minister Adrian Nastase accepting more migrants in order to manipulate Asylum application figures to make good on earlier promises, rather than trying to resolve the problem properly.	con	Blair's deal was short lived, and it was reversed by the UK government in 2006. As a consequence of Romania then joining the EU and EU migration law, the UK government lost the power to restrict migration from Romania from 2014, tying the hands of future UK governments who were then unable to change it despite the democratic desire to do so. This illustrates the fundamentally undemocratic way the EU project operates.
blair's deal was short lived, and it was reversed by the uk government in 2006. as a consequence of romania then joining the eu and eu migration law, the uk government lost the power to restrict migration from romania from 2014, tying the hands of future uk governments who were then unable to change it despite the democratic desire to do so. this illustrates the fundamentally undemocratic way the eu project operates.	1_1.6.1.4.3.2.1.	Blair's deal was short lived, and it was reversed by the UK government in 2006. As a consequence of Romania then joining the EU and EU migration law, the UK government lost the power to restrict migration from Romania from 2014, tying the hands of future UK governments who were then unable to change it despite the democratic desire to do so. This illustrates the fundamentally undemocratic way the EU project operates.	pro	
opening borders to eastern european migrants was in keeping with labours 1997–2010 immigration policies, which had always focused on expanding immigration and removing restrictions, to encourage the economic benefits of increased migration.	1_1.6.1.4.3.3.	Opening borders to eastern european migrants was in keeping with Labours 1997–2010 immigration policies, which had always focused on expanding immigration and removing restrictions, to encourage the economic benefits of increased migration.	con	Under Blair’s Labour government, Britain’s economic immigration policy went from a highly restrictive approach to one of the most expansive in Europe. It resulted in Immigration five times higher than under the previous government.
under blair’s labour government, britain’s economic immigration policy went from a highly restrictive approach to one of the most expansive in europe. it resulted in immigration five times higher than under the previous government.	1_1.6.1.4.3.3.1.	Under Blair’s Labour government, Britain’s economic immigration policy went from a highly restrictive approach to one of the most expansive in Europe. It resulted in Immigration five times higher than under the previous government.	con	
eu rules allow the uk to require migrants to become self-sufficient within 3 months of arriving (excluding students and families), but the uk does not register migrants as they arrive and as such has no way of knowing how long they have been in the uk.	1_1.6.1.4.3.4.	EU rules allow the UK to require migrants to become self-sufficient within 3 months of arriving (excluding students and families), but the UK does not register migrants as they arrive and as such has no way of knowing how long they have been in the UK.	con	There are no efforts to track or control this movement. The Home Office has admitted it does not even know how many EU citizens are in Britain and eligible for welfare.
there are no efforts to track or control this movement. the home office has admitted it does not even know how many eu citizens are in britain and eligible for welfare.	1_1.6.1.4.3.4.1.	There are no efforts to track or control this movement. The Home Office has admitted it does not even know how many EU citizens are in Britain and eligible for welfare.	con	
the uk, ireland and denmark have opt-outs from parts of eu justice and home affairs (jha) policy. they could use those opt-outs to avoid the european agenda on migrations mandatory burden-sharing, if they wanted to.	1_1.6.1.4.4.	The UK, Ireland and Denmark have opt-outs from parts of EU justice and home affairs (JHA) policy. They could use those opt-outs to avoid the European Agenda on Migrations mandatory burden-sharing, if they wanted to.	con	
the only instance in which the uk can deny entry to an eu citizen is on security grounds, such as when the person who tries to enter is a criminal. other than that, the uk has absolutely no control over the people that seek entry to the uk. and as for the people who want to stay in the uk, but they don't satisfy the conditions pointed out in article 7 of the free movement directive, they can still enter if they have a family member residing in the uk that satisfies these conditions.	1_1.6.1.4.5.	The only instance in which the UK can deny entry to an EU citizen is on security grounds, such as when the person who tries to enter is a criminal. Other than that, the UK has absolutely no control over the people that seek entry to the UK. And as for the people who want to stay in the UK, but they don't satisfy the conditions pointed out in Article 7 of the Free Movement Directive, they can still enter if they have a family member residing in the UK that satisfies these conditions.	pro	
eu citizens only have the right to reside in the uk for longer than 3 months if they work, or if they are self-sufficient (including dependents), students, or accompanying family members - article 7 of the citizenship directive.	1_1.6.1.5.	EU citizens only have the right to reside in the UK for longer than 3 months if they work, or if they are self-sufficient (including dependents), students, or accompanying family members - Article 7 of the Citizenship Directive.	con	While the claim is true that as a nation we could assert controls on EU migrants who are not financially independent, we're reliant on EU law to do this and we would still be restricted in our ability to control the flow of EU workers.	EU spouses of UK citizens who earn less than £18,600 are still able to live in the UK and burden the social system, whereas non-EU spouses are not.	EU rules allow the UK to require migrants to become self-sufficient within 3 months of arriving (excluding students and families), but the UK does not register migrants as they arrive and as such has no way of knowing how long they have been in the UK.	The UK could limit 'benefit tourism' from EU countries if it desired to do so, by using Article 7 of the Citizenship Directive.	The UK does not need to leave the EU in order to deport migrants after 3 months unless they can demonstrate that they are employed/self-sustaining. EU rules already permit member countries to do this, but successive British governments have opted not to implement or enforce this rule. The 3 month permitted period facilitates short term travel e.g. tourism. Migrants are not eligible for any state benefit during this time so that such visitors are in no way a cost to the UK.	It is not enough for the UK to maintain partial control. These rules significantly infringe on the UK's ability to regulate immigration as it sees fit, which de-prioritizes the national interest.
while the claim is true that as a nation we could assert controls on eu migrants who are not financially independent, we're reliant on eu law to do this and we would still be restricted in our ability to control the flow of eu workers.	1_1.6.1.5.1.	While the claim is true that as a nation we could assert controls on EU migrants who are not financially independent, we're reliant on EU law to do this and we would still be restricted in our ability to control the flow of EU workers.	pro	
eu spouses of uk citizens who earn less than £18,600 are still able to live in the uk and burden the social system, whereas non-eu spouses are not.	1_1.6.1.5.2.	EU spouses of UK citizens who earn less than £18,600 are still able to live in the UK and burden the social system, whereas non-EU spouses are not.	pro	EU-originating benefit tourism was not one of the major factors in the Brexit referendum, and so is largely incidental to this debate.
eu-originating benefit tourism was not one of the major factors in the brexit referendum, and so is largely incidental to this debate.	1_1.6.1.5.2.1.	EU-originating benefit tourism was not one of the major factors in the Brexit referendum, and so is largely incidental to this debate.	con	Benefit tourism is important to the electorate, and therefore plays an important part in the publics decision to Leave/Remain. 76% said they would support a two year benefits ban for immigrants (2014).
benefit tourism is important to the electorate, and therefore plays an important part in the publics decision to leave/remain. 76% said they would support a two year benefits ban for immigrants (2014).	1_1.6.1.5.2.1.1.	Benefit tourism is important to the electorate, and therefore plays an important part in the publics decision to Leave/Remain. 76% said they would support a two year benefits ban for immigrants (2014).	pro	
the uk could limit 'benefit tourism' from eu countries if it desired to do so, by using article 7 of the citizenship directive.	1_1.6.1.5.4.	The UK could limit 'benefit tourism' from EU countries if it desired to do so, by using Article 7 of the Citizenship Directive.	con	EU-originating benefit tourism was not one of the major factors in the Brexit referendum, and so is largely incidental to this debate.	EU rules allow the UK to require migrants to become self-sufficient within 3 months of arriving (excluding students and families), but the UK does not register migrants as they arrive and as such has no way of knowing how long they have been in the UK.	There are many other reasons to exclude someone from coming to your country other than that they will be a burden on your state. Two reasons in particular would be if they were not a good cultural fit, or they posed a national security risk.
there are many other reasons to exclude someone from coming to your country other than that they will be a burden on your state. two reasons in particular would be if they were not a good cultural fit, or they posed a national security risk.	1_1.6.1.5.4.3.	There are many other reasons to exclude someone from coming to your country other than that they will be a burden on your state. Two reasons in particular would be if they were not a good cultural fit, or they posed a national security risk.	pro	EU regulations already allow countries to reject people with a criminal record.	Member States, like the UK, can restrict entry and residence of EU citizens on grounds of public policy or public security (art 27 and further CD. This is understood as 'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society'. Although to be interpreted restrictively, based on the personal conduct of the individual, it is to be read in light of the national needs of the Member State. 
the uk does not need to leave the eu in order to deport migrants after 3 months unless they can demonstrate that they are employed/self-sustaining. eu rules already permit member countries to do this, but successive british governments have opted not to implement or enforce this rule. the 3 month permitted period facilitates short term travel e.g. tourism. migrants are not eligible for any state benefit during this time so that such visitors are in no way a cost to the uk.	1_1.6.1.5.5.	The UK does not need to leave the EU in order to deport migrants after 3 months unless they can demonstrate that they are employed/self-sustaining. EU rules already permit member countries to do this, but successive British governments have opted not to implement or enforce this rule. The 3 month permitted period facilitates short term travel e.g. tourism. Migrants are not eligible for any state benefit during this time so that such visitors are in no way a cost to the UK.	con	
it is not enough for the uk to maintain partial control. these rules significantly infringe on the uk's ability to regulate immigration as it sees fit, which de-prioritizes the national interest.	1_1.6.1.5.6.	It is not enough for the UK to maintain partial control. These rules significantly infringe on the UK's ability to regulate immigration as it sees fit, which de-prioritizes the national interest.	pro	An uncontrolled influx of cheap labour suppresses wages and benefits business owners at the expense of the working classes.	An uncontrolled flux of migrant workers makes it difficult for Government to plan for and train citizens in critical industries to prevent skills shortages.
an uncontrolled influx of cheap labour suppresses wages and benefits business owners at the expense of the working classes.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.	An uncontrolled influx of cheap labour suppresses wages and benefits business owners at the expense of the working classes.	pro	There is a national minimum wage employers have to abide by, failure to do this for EU citizens would be breaking the law. Obviously this is harder to account for being paid for 'cash in hand' but this is something to target those businesses and traders over, not those willing to work.	Studies find a correlation between an influx of migrants and lower native wage levels.	Studies show access to migrant labour benefits business.	The impact of migration on the wages of the UK-born in the semi-skilled and unskilled sector since 2004 has been about 1 percent, over a period of eight years. This is not only an insignificantly small decrease over a large period of time, it is certainly not something worth trading off the benefits of migration for.
there is a national minimum wage employers have to abide by, failure to do this for eu citizens would be breaking the law. obviously this is harder to account for being paid for 'cash in hand' but this is something to target those businesses and traders over, not those willing to work.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.1.	There is a national minimum wage employers have to abide by, failure to do this for EU citizens would be breaking the law. Obviously this is harder to account for being paid for 'cash in hand' but this is something to target those businesses and traders over, not those willing to work.	con	
studies find a correlation between an influx of migrants and lower native wage levels.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.	Studies find a correlation between an influx of migrants and lower native wage levels.	pro	The Bank of England found that a 10% increase in the proportion of foreign born workers in lower paid service jobs was associated with a near 2% fall in average pay for those jobs, when focusing on particular regions.	A meta study on the subject found concensus that whilst this effect is statistically signifigant, it is much smaller than what is expected.	A study Borjas (2003, p1335) found that "the measured impact of immigration on the wage of native workers fluctuates widely from study to study, but seems to cluster around zero".	The impacts of immigration on the labour market critically depend on the skills of migrants, the skills of existing workers, and the characteristics of the host economy. They also differ between the short and long run when the economy and labour demand can adjust to the increase in labour supply.
the bank of england found that a 10% increase in the proportion of foreign born workers in lower paid service jobs was associated with a near 2% fall in average pay for those jobs, when focusing on particular regions.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.1.	The Bank of England found that a 10% increase in the proportion of foreign born workers in lower paid service jobs was associated with a near 2% fall in average pay for those jobs, when focusing on particular regions.	pro	The study says: "This is a relatively small effect" comparing it to "global changes in technology and trade, or national differences in education, attitudes to gender, and union activity".	It's possible that companies would go out of business or reduce the scale of their business without seasonal migrant workers and thus that many people (including natives) would be left without an income at all.
the study says: "this is a relatively small effect" comparing it to "global changes in technology and trade, or national differences in education, attitudes to gender, and union activity".	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.1.1.	The study says: "This is a relatively small effect" comparing it to "global changes in technology and trade, or national differences in education, attitudes to gender, and union activity".	con	
it's possible that companies would go out of business or reduce the scale of their business without seasonal migrant workers and thus that many people (including natives) would be left without an income at all.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.1.2.	It's possible that companies would go out of business or reduce the scale of their business without seasonal migrant workers and thus that many people (including natives) would be left without an income at all.	con	The population as a whole will also be without the product of those businesses, much of which will be locally produced food.
the population as a whole will also be without the product of those businesses, much of which will be locally produced food.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.1.2.1.	The population as a whole will also be without the product of those businesses, much of which will be locally produced food.	con	This will increase carbon emissions as produce is transported further.
this will increase carbon emissions as produce is transported further.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.1.2.1.1.	This will increase carbon emissions as produce is transported further.	con	
a meta study on the subject found concensus that whilst this effect is statistically signifigant, it is much smaller than what is expected.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.2.	A meta study on the subject found concensus that whilst this effect is statistically signifigant, it is much smaller than what is expected.	con	
a study borjas (2003, p1335) found that "the measured impact of immigration on the wage of native workers fluctuates widely from study to study, but seems to cluster around zero".	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.3.	A study Borjas (2003, p1335) found that "the measured impact of immigration on the wage of native workers fluctuates widely from study to study, but seems to cluster around zero".	con	
the impacts of immigration on the labour market critically depend on the skills of migrants, the skills of existing workers, and the characteristics of the host economy. they also differ between the short and long run when the economy and labour demand can adjust to the increase in labour supply.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.2.4.	The impacts of immigration on the labour market critically depend on the skills of migrants, the skills of existing workers, and the characteristics of the host economy. They also differ between the short and long run when the economy and labour demand can adjust to the increase in labour supply.	con	
studies show access to migrant labour benefits business.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.3.	Studies show access to migrant labour benefits business.	pro	The IMF argues that migration makes sense economically, regardless of the political considerations.
the imf argues that migration makes sense economically, regardless of the political considerations.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.3.1.	The IMF argues that migration makes sense economically, regardless of the political considerations.	pro	
the impact of migration on the wages of the uk-born in the semi-skilled and unskilled sector since 2004 has been about 1 percent, over a period of eight years. this is not only an insignificantly small decrease over a large period of time, it is certainly not something worth trading off the benefits of migration for.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.4.	The impact of migration on the wages of the UK-born in the semi-skilled and unskilled sector since 2004 has been about 1 percent, over a period of eight years. This is not only an insignificantly small decrease over a large period of time, it is certainly not something worth trading off the benefits of migration for.	con	It is easy to say that wage repression is insignificant when it is not yourself on the breadline. The studies referred to in the parent shows that immigration reduces wages at the very bottom where small amounts matter and takes no account of inflation: 1% actual decrease is quite a significant loss in real terms against rising costs and prices.
it is easy to say that wage repression is insignificant when it is not yourself on the breadline. the studies referred to in the parent shows that immigration reduces wages at the very bottom where small amounts matter and takes no account of inflation: 1% actual decrease is quite a significant loss in real terms against rising costs and prices.	1_1.6.1.5.6.1.4.1.	It is easy to say that wage repression is insignificant when it is not yourself on the breadline. The studies referred to in the parent shows that immigration reduces wages at the very bottom where small amounts matter and takes no account of inflation: 1% actual decrease is quite a significant loss in real terms against rising costs and prices.	pro	
an uncontrolled flux of migrant workers makes it difficult for government to plan for and train citizens in critical industries to prevent skills shortages.	1_1.6.1.5.6.2.	An uncontrolled flux of migrant workers makes it difficult for Government to plan for and train citizens in critical industries to prevent skills shortages.	pro	The UK has skills shortages and requires migrant workers to fill key roles now.
the uk has skills shortages and requires migrant workers to fill key roles now.	1_1.6.1.5.6.2.1.	The UK has skills shortages and requires migrant workers to fill key roles now.	con	
the majority of immigration to the uk comes from non-eu countries, which the uk can already control.	1_1.6.1.6.	The majority of immigration to the UK comes from non-EU countries, which the UK can already control.	con	The EU accounts for less than 10% of the world's population, therefore it is inappropriate for it to account for over 40% of UK migrants.	UK Immigration statistics categorize overseas students as migrants, but as many of these students will subsequently leave the UK, this overly inflates migrant numbers.	Only 2.3m of the UK's current 5.5m foreign born workers are from the EU (source) and in the period 1993 to 2017 only 49% of the increase was due to EU born nationals. Leaving the EU will only partially address any perceived immigration issue.
the eu accounts for less than 10% of the world's population, therefore it is inappropriate for it to account for over 40% of uk migrants.	1_1.6.1.6.1.	The EU accounts for less than 10% of the world's population, therefore it is inappropriate for it to account for over 40% of UK migrants.	pro	It is only natural for neighboring countries to account for more migrants, especially when it's easier.	This is a very simplistic statistic that doesn't address real world issues and circumstances. It's far less likely for people from African nations to even be able to afford to even come to Britain whilst people from South America are far more likely to migrate to the USA due to geography.	People have a natural tendency to migrate locally, both because they tend to share common cultural and linguistic roots and because of geographical logistics.	There is no global standard governing the appropriateness or otherwise of the nationality mix of any nation's migrant population.	The EU accounts for a much greater share of the world's skilled labour force and has many workers with particular specialised skills, which the UK requires.
it is only natural for neighboring countries to account for more migrants, especially when it's easier.	1_1.6.1.6.1.1.	It is only natural for neighboring countries to account for more migrants, especially when it's easier.	con	
this is a very simplistic statistic that doesn't address real world issues and circumstances. it's far less likely for people from african nations to even be able to afford to even come to britain whilst people from south america are far more likely to migrate to the usa due to geography.	1_1.6.1.6.1.2.	This is a very simplistic statistic that doesn't address real world issues and circumstances. It's far less likely for people from African nations to even be able to afford to even come to Britain whilst people from South America are far more likely to migrate to the USA due to geography.	con	
people have a natural tendency to migrate locally, both because they tend to share common cultural and linguistic roots and because of geographical logistics.	1_1.6.1.6.1.3.	People have a natural tendency to migrate locally, both because they tend to share common cultural and linguistic roots and because of geographical logistics.	con	
there is no global standard governing the appropriateness or otherwise of the nationality mix of any nation's migrant population.	1_1.6.1.6.1.4.	There is no global standard governing the appropriateness or otherwise of the nationality mix of any nation's migrant population.	con	
the eu accounts for a much greater share of the world's skilled labour force and has many workers with particular specialised skills, which the uk requires.	1_1.6.1.6.1.5.	The EU accounts for a much greater share of the world's skilled labour force and has many workers with particular specialised skills, which the UK requires.	con	
uk immigration statistics categorize overseas students as migrants, but as many of these students will subsequently leave the uk, this overly inflates migrant numbers.	1_1.6.1.6.2.	UK Immigration statistics categorize overseas students as migrants, but as many of these students will subsequently leave the UK, this overly inflates migrant numbers.	con	The ONS found that many people do not simply immigrate for study and leave afterwards; their lives are more complex – some people arrive on a work visa and legitimately change to a study visa and vice versa.
the ons found that many people do not simply immigrate for study and leave afterwards; their lives are more complex – some people arrive on a work visa and legitimately change to a study visa and vice versa.	1_1.6.1.6.2.1.	The ONS found that many people do not simply immigrate for study and leave afterwards; their lives are more complex – some people arrive on a work visa and legitimately change to a study visa and vice versa.	pro	
only 2.3m of the uk's current 5.5m foreign born workers are from the eu (source) and in the period 1993 to 2017 only 49% of the increase was due to eu born nationals. leaving the eu will only partially address any perceived immigration issue.	1_1.6.1.6.3.	Only 2.3m of the UK's current 5.5m foreign born workers are from the EU (source) and in the period 1993 to 2017 only 49% of the increase was due to EU born nationals. Leaving the EU will only partially address any perceived immigration issue.	con	
consistent polling has shown that a sizable majority believe the uk's immigration levels are too high.	1_1.6.2.	Consistent polling has shown that a sizable majority believe the UK's immigration levels are too high.	pro	The BSA poll is well respected and has been running since 1983.	Polling the electorate on their beliefs about the levels of immigration is not a valid method of establishing the correct levels or possible effects of immigration, because individual perceptions can be influenced by the media and scaremongering.	Public perception and concern over immigration levels have little resemblance to the actual levels of immigration.LSE Blog - Perceptions and Reality	Polls with public results alter perceptions and public opinion by making the majority opinion observable to people who may be influenced when reacting to that same issue.	Comparing attitudes before and after the referendum from within the same groups of individuals suggests that both Leavers and Remainers have softened in their attitudes towards immigration.	Immigration policy should not be based on what some people in the country think the immigration levels should be, but rather what evidence indicates would be best.
the bsa poll is well respected and has been running since 1983.	1_1.6.2.1.	The BSA poll is well respected and has been running since 1983.	pro	How respected a poll is does not take into account that people's perception of immigration is not a solid basis to enact immigration policies.
how respected a poll is does not take into account that people's perception of immigration is not a solid basis to enact immigration policies.	1_1.6.2.1.1.	How respected a poll is does not take into account that people's perception of immigration is not a solid basis to enact immigration policies.	con	
polling the electorate on their beliefs about the levels of immigration is not a valid method of establishing the correct levels or possible effects of immigration, because individual perceptions can be influenced by the media and scaremongering.	1_1.6.2.2.	Polling the electorate on their beliefs about the levels of immigration is not a valid method of establishing the correct levels or possible effects of immigration, because individual perceptions can be influenced by the media and scaremongering.	con	Actually, it's true that British people feel they're hosting more immigrants than those who they really host.	It should be noted however, that the opinions of those that compete for services with migrants are the ones whose lives are most affected by immigration. We should be careful not to neglect the feelings of some people based, for example, on your opinion of the newspaper they read.
actually, it's true that british people feel they're hosting more immigrants than those who they really host.	1_1.6.2.2.1.	Actually, it's true that British people feel they're hosting more immigrants than those who they really host.	con	
it should be noted however, that the opinions of those that compete for services with migrants are the ones whose lives are most affected by immigration. we should be careful not to neglect the feelings of some people based, for example, on your opinion of the newspaper they read.	1_1.6.2.2.2.	It should be noted however, that the opinions of those that compete for services with migrants are the ones whose lives are most affected by immigration. We should be careful not to neglect the feelings of some people based, for example, on your opinion of the newspaper they read.	pro	Societal fears should not be a factor in policy making. Misperceptions should be mitigated through correct, responsible information to those sectors of the society by the institutions.
societal fears should not be a factor in policy making. misperceptions should be mitigated through correct, responsible information to those sectors of the society by the institutions.	1_1.6.2.2.2.1.	Societal fears should not be a factor in policy making. Misperceptions should be mitigated through correct, responsible information to those sectors of the society by the institutions.	con	
public perception and concern over immigration levels have little resemblance to the actual levels of immigration.lse blog - perceptions and reality	1_1.6.2.3.	Public perception and concern over immigration levels have little resemblance to the actual levels of immigration.LSE Blog - Perceptions and Reality	con	
polls with public results alter perceptions and public opinion by making the majority opinion observable to people who may be influenced when reacting to that same issue.	1_1.6.2.4.	Polls with public results alter perceptions and public opinion by making the majority opinion observable to people who may be influenced when reacting to that same issue.	con	
comparing attitudes before and after the referendum from within the same groups of individuals suggests that both leavers and remainers have softened in their attitudes towards immigration.	1_1.6.2.5.	Comparing attitudes before and after the referendum from within the same groups of individuals suggests that both Leavers and Remainers have softened in their attitudes towards immigration.	con	This has been quantified at 19% softening over 4 years. Inconsistent question wording makes historical comparisons difficult, but good Ipsos MORI data since 2013 suggests that there has been a recent softening of attitudes with just 45% agreeing that there are too many immigrants in 2017 compared to 64% just 4 years earlier. Figure 2
this has been quantified at 19% softening over 4 years. inconsistent question wording makes historical comparisons difficult, but good ipsos mori data since 2013 suggests that there has been a recent softening of attitudes with just 45% agreeing that there are too many immigrants in 2017 compared to 64% just 4 years earlier. figure 2	1_1.6.2.5.1.	This has been quantified at 19% softening over 4 years. Inconsistent question wording makes historical comparisons difficult, but good Ipsos MORI data since 2013 suggests that there has been a recent softening of attitudes with just 45% agreeing that there are too many immigrants in 2017 compared to 64% just 4 years earlier. Figure 2	con	
immigration policy should not be based on what some people in the country think the immigration levels should be, but rather what evidence indicates would be best.	1_1.6.2.6.	Immigration policy should not be based on what some people in the country think the immigration levels should be, but rather what evidence indicates would be best.	con	
the possibility that turkey, an eu candidate country that borders war-torn syria and has a large population, may join the eu is a major concern to many british eurosceptics.	1_1.6.3.	The possibility that Turkey, an EU candidate country that borders war-torn Syria and has a large population, may join the EU is a major concern to many British Eurosceptics.	pro	If Turkey, or any other country, wants to join the EU, they must first integrate EU policy spanning over 35 areas. These include human rights policies and freedom of expression. In 10 years Turkey has only managed to align with the EU on two policy areas: science and research. This not only proves that Turkey is not currently anywhere close to joining the EU but also shows that if a country such as Turkey were to join, it would be in a state where its values and interests align with the UK's.	Polls in Turkey have shown mixed support for joining the EU and the support has decreased over the past 10 years.	The UK have a veto on whether Turkey ever joined the EU.	The EU is unlikely to admit Turkey under its current political situation with or without the UK. Moreover, the UK (while historically in favor of Turkey's accession) would probably be against it if it remains and would have veto power over its accession.	The reasons why Eurosceptics object to Turkish EU membership are largely unjustified and based on racial fears. Even if the UK should be allowed to regulate its own immigration policy, these would be illegitimate reasons to exclude Turkey.
if turkey, or any other country, wants to join the eu, they must first integrate eu policy spanning over 35 areas. these include human rights policies and freedom of expression. in 10 years turkey has only managed to align with the eu on two policy areas: science and research. this not only proves that turkey is not currently anywhere close to joining the eu but also shows that if a country such as turkey were to join, it would be in a state where its values and interests align with the uk's.	1_1.6.3.1.	If Turkey, or any other country, wants to join the EU, they must first integrate EU policy spanning over 35 areas. These include human rights policies and freedom of expression. In 10 years Turkey has only managed to align with the EU on two policy areas: science and research. This not only proves that Turkey is not currently anywhere close to joining the EU but also shows that if a country such as Turkey were to join, it would be in a state where its values and interests align with the UK's.	con	
polls in turkey have shown mixed support for joining the eu and the support has decreased over the past 10 years.	1_1.6.3.2.	Polls in Turkey have shown mixed support for joining the EU and the support has decreased over the past 10 years.	con	
the uk have a veto on whether turkey ever joined the eu.	1_1.6.3.3.	The UK have a veto on whether Turkey ever joined the EU.	con	
the eu is unlikely to admit turkey under its current political situation with or without the uk. moreover, the uk (while historically in favor of turkey's accession) would probably be against it if it remains and would have veto power over its accession.	1_1.6.3.4.	The EU is unlikely to admit Turkey under its current political situation with or without the UK. Moreover, the UK (while historically in favor of Turkey's accession) would probably be against it if it remains and would have veto power over its accession.	con	
the reasons why eurosceptics object to turkish eu membership are largely unjustified and based on racial fears. even if the uk should be allowed to regulate its own immigration policy, these would be illegitimate reasons to exclude turkey.	1_1.6.3.5.	The reasons why Eurosceptics object to Turkish EU membership are largely unjustified and based on racial fears. Even if the UK should be allowed to regulate its own immigration policy, these would be illegitimate reasons to exclude Turkey.	con	Turkish President Erdogan's purge on media and the 2017 referendum granting him further control over government institutions are not compatible with EU democratic standards and anti-corruption efforts.
turkish president erdogan's purge on media and the 2017 referendum granting him further control over government institutions are not compatible with eu democratic standards and anti-corruption efforts.	1_1.6.3.5.1.	Turkish President Erdogan's purge on media and the 2017 referendum granting him further control over government institutions are not compatible with EU democratic standards and anti-corruption efforts.	pro	
the eu is not a third party imposing an immigration policy on the uk. as a member of the eu, the uk was involved in the drafting of, and signed up to, the maastricht treaty which introduced the notion of eu citizenship, and the right of any citizen to reside anywhere within the union. the uk was exercising its right to decide its immigration policy by introducing free movement (along with its fellow eu-members).	1_1.6.4.	The EU is not a third party imposing an immigration policy on the UK. As a member of the EU, the UK was involved in the drafting of, and signed up to, the Maastricht Treaty which introduced the notion of EU citizenship, and the right of any citizen to reside anywhere within the Union. The UK was exercising its right to decide its immigration policy by introducing free movement (along with its fellow EU-members).	con	
the eu is blamed for uncontrolled immigration, yet the eu does have laws that do this that the uk has failed to enact.	1_1.6.5.	The EU is blamed for uncontrolled immigration, yet the EU does have laws that do this that the UK has failed to enact.	con	The UK can sufficiently control immigration while remaining in the EU.
the uk has full control over the flow of non-eu migrants, which accounts for over 80% of the uk's recent immigrant intake. a failure to control controllable immigration gives a strong indication that eu immigration would not be significantly reduced by brexit.	1_1.6.6.	The UK has full control over the flow of non-EU migrants, which accounts for over 80% of the UK's recent immigrant intake. A failure to control controllable immigration gives a strong indication that EU immigration would not be significantly reduced by Brexit.	con	The majority of immigration to the UK comes from non-EU countries, which the UK can already control.
this would allow the uk to implement a merit-based immigration policy which, due to strict policing and mandatory quotas, would be impossible under eu regulations.	1_1.6.7.	This would allow the UK to implement a merit-based immigration policy which, due to strict policing and mandatory quotas, would be impossible under EU regulations.	pro	Successive UK Governments have not applied all the measures that are available to police immigration from either without or within the EU.  Under resourced Customs and Immigration departments UK wide are the problem, not EU membership as such.
successive uk governments have not applied all the measures that are available to police immigration from either without or within the eu.  under resourced customs and immigration departments uk wide are the problem, not eu membership as such.	1_1.6.7.1.	Successive UK Governments have not applied all the measures that are available to police immigration from either without or within the EU.  Under resourced Customs and Immigration departments UK wide are the problem, not EU membership as such.	con	Immigration departments in Britain do not have any figures as to how many legal EU and non-EU migrants are currently living in Britain Link. The Windrush scandal happened because of poor immigration records and Theresa May's "Hostile Environment" policies.
immigration departments in britain do not have any figures as to how many legal eu and non-eu migrants are currently living in britain link. the windrush scandal happened because of poor immigration records and theresa may's "hostile environment" policies.	1_1.6.7.1.1.	Immigration departments in Britain do not have any figures as to how many legal EU and non-EU migrants are currently living in Britain Link. The Windrush scandal happened because of poor immigration records and Theresa May's "Hostile Environment" policies.	con	
by leaving the eu, the uk has to sign free trade deals with other nations, many of whom may require increased freedom of movement of people, which could potentially offset any decreased immigration from the eu.	1_1.6.8.	By leaving the EU, the UK has to sign free trade deals with other nations, many of whom may require increased freedom of movement of people, which could potentially offset any decreased immigration from the EU.	con	India has stated that it cannot separate free movement of people from the free flow of goods, services and investments, indicating that any free trade deal will likely require increased immigration from India.	Australia has said that it wants to liberalise immigration visa policies for Australians wanting to come to the UK.	This becomes a matter that can then be controlled by the UK government and renegotiated as necessary, and so is a desirable outcome for those who voted to regain control of the UK's borders.	It is highly unlikely any liberalisation of visas will be as expansive as the EU's free movement of people policies.	The UK controlling their own immigration policy doesn't necessarily mean it will limit immigration. Perhaps the UK will set such immigration policies as to avoid costs of low immigration or to obtain a free trade agreement with India or Australia.
india has stated that it cannot separate free movement of people from the free flow of goods, services and investments, indicating that any free trade deal will likely require increased immigration from india.	1_1.6.8.1.	India has stated that it cannot separate free movement of people from the free flow of goods, services and investments, indicating that any free trade deal will likely require increased immigration from India.	con	This statement was from "a senior Indian official", rather than an official red line. It should be seen as a posturing/bargaining point, rather than a certainty.
this statement was from "a senior indian official", rather than an official red line. it should be seen as a posturing/bargaining point, rather than a certainty.	1_1.6.8.1.1.	This statement was from "a senior Indian official", rather than an official red line. It should be seen as a posturing/bargaining point, rather than a certainty.	pro	
australia has said that it wants to liberalise immigration visa policies for australians wanting to come to the uk.	1_1.6.8.2.	Australia has said that it wants to liberalise immigration visa policies for Australians wanting to come to the UK.	con	
this becomes a matter that can then be controlled by the uk government and renegotiated as necessary, and so is a desirable outcome for those who voted to regain control of the uk's borders.	1_1.6.8.3.	This becomes a matter that can then be controlled by the UK government and renegotiated as necessary, and so is a desirable outcome for those who voted to regain control of the UK's borders.	pro	
it is highly unlikely any liberalisation of visas will be as expansive as the eu's free movement of people policies.	1_1.6.8.4.	It is highly unlikely any liberalisation of visas will be as expansive as the EU's free movement of people policies.	pro	
the uk controlling their own immigration policy doesn't necessarily mean it will limit immigration. perhaps the uk will set such immigration policies as to avoid costs of low immigration or to obtain a free trade agreement with india or australia.	1_1.6.8.5.	The UK controlling their own immigration policy doesn't necessarily mean it will limit immigration. Perhaps the UK will set such immigration policies as to avoid costs of low immigration or to obtain a free trade agreement with India or Australia.	pro	Much of the initial impetus of Brexit was around immigration being too high, impacting housing and infrastructure like schools and the NHS. Suggesting that we could have the same or more immigration as a result of Brexit damages the whole "will of the people" argument.
much of the initial impetus of brexit was around immigration being too high, impacting housing and infrastructure like schools and the nhs. suggesting that we could have the same or more immigration as a result of brexit damages the whole "will of the people" argument.	1_1.6.8.5.1.	Much of the initial impetus of Brexit was around immigration being too high, impacting housing and infrastructure like schools and the NHS. Suggesting that we could have the same or more immigration as a result of Brexit damages the whole "will of the people" argument.	con	
an open immigration policy with the eu puts the uk's economy at risk.	1_1.6.9.	An open immigration policy with the EU puts the UK's economy at risk.	pro	The UK needs the power to restrict entry into the country in order to maintain its ability to provide for the needs of its citizens in the future, otherwise an unemployment crisis in the rest of the EU could burden the UK with an influx of people in need.	The level of unemployment of the British state was on a downwards trend even when taking in a significant influx of immigrants prior to the initial vote of in or out.	Market forces are what control immigration in the EU, making the countries with high economic worth more appealing to the best talent that the EU has to offer. For the UK to compete for these key roles, frictionless employment is essential.	The free movement of people between the UK and the rest of the EU is actually economically beneficial for the UK.
the uk needs the power to restrict entry into the country in order to maintain its ability to provide for the needs of its citizens in the future, otherwise an unemployment crisis in the rest of the eu could burden the uk with an influx of people in need.	1_1.6.9.1.	The UK needs the power to restrict entry into the country in order to maintain its ability to provide for the needs of its citizens in the future, otherwise an unemployment crisis in the rest of the EU could burden the UK with an influx of people in need.	pro	EU citizens only have the right to reside in the UK for longer than 3 months if they work, or if they are self-sufficient (including dependents), students, or accompanying family members - Article 7 of the Citizenship Directive.	According to \1\, EU migrants contributed on average £2,300 more than the average contribution to UK public finances. UK-born adults contribute on average £70 less than the average and non-EU migrants contribute on average £800 less than the average. On average, EU migrants therefore are less of a burden to the system than UK-born. In fact they counter the burden that UK-born and non-EU migrants pose on the country thus restricting their access to the UK would be detrimental. \1\
according to \1\, eu migrants contributed on average £2,300 more than the average contribution to uk public finances. uk-born adults contribute on average £70 less than the average and non-eu migrants contribute on average £800 less than the average. on average, eu migrants therefore are less of a burden to the system than uk-born. in fact they counter the burden that uk-born and non-eu migrants pose on the country thus restricting their access to the uk would be detrimental. \1\	1_1.6.9.1.2.	According to \1\, EU migrants contributed on average £2,300 more than the average contribution to UK public finances. UK-born adults contribute on average £70 less than the average and non-EU migrants contribute on average £800 less than the average. On average, EU migrants therefore are less of a burden to the system than UK-born. In fact they counter the burden that UK-born and non-EU migrants pose on the country thus restricting their access to the UK would be detrimental. \1\	con	
the level of unemployment of the british state was on a downwards trend even when taking in a significant influx of immigrants prior to the initial vote of in or out.	1_1.6.9.2.	The level of unemployment of the British state was on a downwards trend even when taking in a significant influx of immigrants prior to the initial vote of in or out.	con	
market forces are what control immigration in the eu, making the countries with high economic worth more appealing to the best talent that the eu has to offer. for the uk to compete for these key roles, frictionless employment is essential.	1_1.6.9.3.	Market forces are what control immigration in the EU, making the countries with high economic worth more appealing to the best talent that the EU has to offer. For the UK to compete for these key roles, frictionless employment is essential.	con	Once we have free trade deals with countries such as India, which will include free movement of workers, employers will be free to recruit workers from whichever nation can supply them the cheapest, whereas if the UK remains in the EU, it will be caught by new EU regulations which prevent immigrant labour from undercutting the local workforce.
once we have free trade deals with countries such as india, which will include free movement of workers, employers will be free to recruit workers from whichever nation can supply them the cheapest, whereas if the uk remains in the eu, it will be caught by new eu regulations which prevent immigrant labour from undercutting the local workforce.	1_1.6.9.3.1.	Once we have free trade deals with countries such as India, which will include free movement of workers, employers will be free to recruit workers from whichever nation can supply them the cheapest, whereas if the UK remains in the EU, it will be caught by new EU regulations which prevent immigrant labour from undercutting the local workforce.	pro	
the free movement of people between the uk and the rest of the eu is actually economically beneficial for the uk.	1_1.6.9.4.	The free movement of people between the UK and the rest of the EU is actually economically beneficial for the UK.	con	The USA is commonly called the most economically powerful country in the world, and has the highest number of migrants (46 million).	The free movement of people may have been economically beneficial for the UK in the past, however the law of diminishing returns suggests that the economic benefits are being increasingly eroded by the associated societal costs, as negative externalities caused by population pressures mount. This is what has happened in the UK.	Whether or not it is beneficial in an economic sense does not affect whether or not the UK should have the right to control it.	Migrants make a positive net contribution to the economy.	Engineered austerity, not immigration, is behind a lack of resources.	Our ageing population will not be able to support itself on the tax revenue of the next generation, without attracting an immigrant population of working-age people.	The end of the free movement of people will reduce the supply of labour, damaging the British economy.	Reducing immigration is a political choice that is not necessitated by a hard Brexit.
the usa is commonly called the most economically powerful country in the world, and has the highest number of migrants (46 million).	1_1.6.9.4.1.	The USA is commonly called the most economically powerful country in the world, and has the highest number of migrants (46 million).	con	Correlation does not necessarily mean causation - immigration might not be a factor causing success, but a reaction to success.	A survey of leading economists shows a consensus behind the view that high-skilled immigration makes the average American better off. A survey of the same economists also shows strong support behind the notion that low-skilled immigration makes the average American better off.	America, the promised land, was built on the backs of immigrants. It's melting pot of migrants is a huge part of it's conception, history, and success.	The other countries with next highest immigration levels are also all economically strong countries:  Germany (12m), Russia (11m), Saudi Arabia (10m), UK (8m).	The USA does not have free movement of people with the EU, indicating free movement with  the EU is in no way a prerequisite for a country to be economically  powerful.
correlation does not necessarily mean causation - immigration might not be a factor causing success, but a reaction to success.	1_1.6.9.4.1.1.	Correlation does not necessarily mean causation - immigration might not be a factor causing success, but a reaction to success.	pro	Immigrants naturally flock away from less successful countries towards more successful countries.
immigrants naturally flock away from less successful countries towards more successful countries.	1_1.6.9.4.1.1.1.	Immigrants naturally flock away from less successful countries towards more successful countries.	pro	
a survey of leading economists shows a consensus behind the view that high-skilled immigration makes the average american better off. a survey of the same economists also shows strong support behind the notion that low-skilled immigration makes the average american better off.	1_1.6.9.4.1.2.	A survey of leading economists shows a consensus behind the view that high-skilled immigration makes the average American better off. A survey of the same economists also shows strong support behind the notion that low-skilled immigration makes the average American better off.	con	The predictions of "economists" in general are not credible. Specific economists with demonstrable track records of predictive success may be more credible.
the predictions of "economists" in general are not credible. specific economists with demonstrable track records of predictive success may be more credible.	1_1.6.9.4.1.2.1.	The predictions of "economists" in general are not credible. Specific economists with demonstrable track records of predictive success may be more credible.	pro	The predictions and views of surveyed economists are so often misleading or plain wrong.	Economics is not a science or -at least- economists are not scientists.	Economists have been found guilty of groupthink, guided by political ends and using error-prone gravity modelling.
the predictions and views of surveyed economists are so often misleading or plain wrong.	1_1.6.9.4.1.2.1.1.	The predictions and views of surveyed economists are so often misleading or plain wrong.	pro	
economics is not a science or -at least- economists are not scientists.	1_1.6.9.4.1.2.1.2.	Economics is not a science or -at least- economists are not scientists.	pro	
economists have been found guilty of groupthink, guided by political ends and using error-prone gravity modelling.	1_1.6.9.4.1.2.1.3.	Economists have been found guilty of groupthink, guided by political ends and using error-prone gravity modelling.	pro	
america, the promised land, was built on the backs of immigrants. it's melting pot of migrants is a huge part of it's conception, history, and success.	1_1.6.9.4.1.3.	America, the promised land, was built on the backs of immigrants. It's melting pot of migrants is a huge part of it's conception, history, and success.	con	Because the United States is a settler colonial society, the vast majority of Americans, with the exception of Native Americans, can trace their ancestry to immigrants from other nations.
because the united states is a settler colonial society, the vast majority of americans, with the exception of native americans, can trace their ancestry to immigrants from other nations.	1_1.6.9.4.1.3.1.	Because the United States is a settler colonial society, the vast majority of Americans, with the exception of Native Americans, can trace their ancestry to immigrants from other nations.	con	
the other countries with next highest immigration levels are also all economically strong countries:  germany (12m), russia (11m), saudi arabia (10m), uk (8m).	1_1.6.9.4.1.4.	The other countries with next highest immigration levels are also all economically strong countries:  Germany (12m), Russia (11m), Saudi Arabia (10m), UK (8m).	con	The economies of Russia and Saudi Arabia are massively reliant on oil and natural gas, and so in addition to this being something unattributable to migration, the lack of diversification makes the economies prone to economic shock and underlying strength may be illusory.	Germany, UK, and Russia are in the top 5 economies in Europe, by nominal and PPP GDP.	The Saudi economy is the largest in the Arab world.
the economies of russia and saudi arabia are massively reliant on oil and natural gas, and so in addition to this being something unattributable to migration, the lack of diversification makes the economies prone to economic shock and underlying strength may be illusory.	1_1.6.9.4.1.4.1.	The economies of Russia and Saudi Arabia are massively reliant on oil and natural gas, and so in addition to this being something unattributable to migration, the lack of diversification makes the economies prone to economic shock and underlying strength may be illusory.	pro	
germany, uk, and russia are in the top 5 economies in europe, by nominal and ppp gdp.	1_1.6.9.4.1.4.2.	Germany, UK, and Russia are in the top 5 economies in Europe, by nominal and PPP GDP.	con	Russia is 46th out of 50 European countries by measure of GDP growth rate, and 31st out of 50 by GDP per capita.
russia is 46th out of 50 european countries by measure of gdp growth rate, and 31st out of 50 by gdp per capita.	1_1.6.9.4.1.4.2.1.	Russia is 46th out of 50 European countries by measure of GDP growth rate, and 31st out of 50 by GDP per capita.	pro	
the saudi economy is the largest in the arab world.	1_1.6.9.4.1.4.3.	The Saudi economy is the largest in the Arab world.	con	
the usa does not have free movement of people with the eu, indicating free movement with  the eu is in no way a prerequisite for a country to be economically  powerful.	1_1.6.9.4.1.5.	The USA does not have free movement of people with the EU, indicating free movement with  the EU is in no way a prerequisite for a country to be economically  powerful.	pro	
the free movement of people may have been economically beneficial for the uk in the past, however the law of diminishing returns suggests that the economic benefits are being increasingly eroded by the associated societal costs, as negative externalities caused by population pressures mount. this is what has happened in the uk.	1_1.6.9.4.2.	The free movement of people may have been economically beneficial for the UK in the past, however the law of diminishing returns suggests that the economic benefits are being increasingly eroded by the associated societal costs, as negative externalities caused by population pressures mount. This is what has happened in the UK.	pro	Immigration has been the largest driver of the increasing population, according to the Office for National Statistics.	In 2010, a cross-party group including MPs, poverty experts, economic historians, and the former Archbishop of Canterbury issued a “Declaration on Population”. It warned that a UK population of 70 million – which will arrive about 2030, based on current trends – “would be seriously damaging to the future harmony of our society.”	The UK's ageing population makes the free movement of people advantageous to the long-term strategic requirements of the UK population by providing working age migrants to do the necessary jobs, care for the elderly and contribute to public service funding.	The "negative externalities", such as housing and transport issues, are planning failures. The failure of government to properly allocate taxes to manage infrastructure investment requirements has little to do with immigration.
immigration has been the largest driver of the increasing population, according to the office for national statistics.	1_1.6.9.4.2.1.	Immigration has been the largest driver of the increasing population, according to the Office for National Statistics.	pro	Given that the average birthrate in the UK is 1.7 children per couple, the UK needs immigration to reach a stable population replacement rate.
given that the average birthrate in the uk is 1.7 children per couple, the uk needs immigration to reach a stable population replacement rate.	1_1.6.9.4.2.1.1.	Given that the average birthrate in the UK is 1.7 children per couple, the UK needs immigration to reach a stable population replacement rate.	con	
in 2010, a cross-party group including mps, poverty experts, economic historians, and the former archbishop of canterbury issued a “declaration on population”. it warned that a uk population of 70 million – which will arrive about 2030, based on current trends – “would be seriously damaging to the future harmony of our society.”	1_1.6.9.4.2.2.	In 2010, a cross-party group including MPs, poverty experts, economic historians, and the former Archbishop of Canterbury issued a “Declaration on Population”. It warned that a UK population of 70 million – which will arrive about 2030, based on current trends – “would be seriously damaging to the future harmony of our society.”	pro	
the uk's ageing population makes the free movement of people advantageous to the long-term strategic requirements of the uk population by providing working age migrants to do the necessary jobs, care for the elderly and contribute to public service funding.	1_1.6.9.4.2.3.	The UK's ageing population makes the free movement of people advantageous to the long-term strategic requirements of the UK population by providing working age migrants to do the necessary jobs, care for the elderly and contribute to public service funding.	con	EU migrants are younger and more likely to be in work compared to the average member of the population, and so pay more tax and rely on state services less.
eu migrants are younger and more likely to be in work compared to the average member of the population, and so pay more tax and rely on state services less.	1_1.6.9.4.2.3.1.	EU migrants are younger and more likely to be in work compared to the average member of the population, and so pay more tax and rely on state services less.	con	
the "negative externalities", such as housing and transport issues, are planning failures. the failure of government to properly allocate taxes to manage infrastructure investment requirements has little to do with immigration.	1_1.6.9.4.2.4.	The "negative externalities", such as housing and transport issues, are planning failures. The failure of government to properly allocate taxes to manage infrastructure investment requirements has little to do with immigration.	con	
whether or not it is beneficial in an economic sense does not affect whether or not the uk should have the right to control it.	1_1.6.9.4.3.	Whether or not it is beneficial in an economic sense does not affect whether or not the UK should have the right to control it.	pro	
migrants make a positive net contribution to the economy.	1_1.6.9.4.4.	Migrants make a positive net contribution to the economy.	con	Data analysis of 30 years of data from 15 countries in Western Europe shows that migrants positively affect the economy within a year of arrival, continuing to have significant impact for 2+ years.	In America, immigrants are net fiscal contributors on the federal level.	Researchers generally agree that immigrants from the European Economic Area (EEA) and recent immigrants are, as groups, more likely to have a positive net fiscal impact.	A report from the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) in 2005 found that expenditure attributed to immigrants grew by more than the revenue from them, resulting in a negative impact of -£0.4 billion in 2003-4.	MigrationWatch UK studies show that depending on how you account for dependent children or the elderly, migrants give a negative net contribution.	HMRC released a report in May 2016, which said that recently arrived EEA nationals –those who arrived within the previous 4 years – received £0.56 billion in tax credits and Child Benefit in the 2013/14 fiscal year but paid £3.11 billion in income taxes and national insurance contributions.	In 2013 the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) predicted that in the long term (50 years) higher net immigration would reduce pressure on government debt.	The OECD found that migration in the UK contributed +0.46% of GDP.	Studies find a correlation between an influx of migrants and lower native wage levels.	It's possible that companies would go out of business or reduce the scale of their business without seasonal migrant workers and thus that many people (including natives) would be left without an income at all.	Studies show access to migrant labour benefits business.
data analysis of 30 years of data from 15 countries in western europe shows that migrants positively affect the economy within a year of arrival, continuing to have significant impact for 2+ years.	1_1.6.9.4.4.1.	Data analysis of 30 years of data from 15 countries in Western Europe shows that migrants positively affect the economy within a year of arrival, continuing to have significant impact for 2+ years.	con	
in america, immigrants are net fiscal contributors on the federal level.	1_1.6.9.4.4.2.	In America, immigrants are net fiscal contributors on the federal level.	con	
researchers generally agree that immigrants from the european economic area (eea) and recent immigrants are, as groups, more likely to have a positive net fiscal impact.	1_1.6.9.4.4.3.	Researchers generally agree that immigrants from the European Economic Area (EEA) and recent immigrants are, as groups, more likely to have a positive net fiscal impact.	con	A 2014 UCL study estimated that during the years 1995-2011 the total fiscal impact of EEA migrants in the UK was about +£0.3 billion per year, but the total fiscal impact of non-EEA migrants for this period was estimated at -£6.9 billion per year. The UK-born population impact was -£34.8 billion per year.
a 2014 ucl study estimated that during the years 1995-2011 the total fiscal impact of eea migrants in the uk was about +£0.3 billion per year, but the total fiscal impact of non-eea migrants for this period was estimated at -£6.9 billion per year. the uk-born population impact was -£34.8 billion per year.	1_1.6.9.4.4.3.1.	A 2014 UCL study estimated that during the years 1995-2011 the total fiscal impact of EEA migrants in the UK was about +£0.3 billion per year, but the total fiscal impact of non-EEA migrants for this period was estimated at -£6.9 billion per year. The UK-born population impact was -£34.8 billion per year.	con	
a report from the institute for public policy research (ippr) in 2005 found that expenditure attributed to immigrants grew by more than the revenue from them, resulting in a negative impact of -£0.4 billion in 2003-4.	1_1.6.9.4.4.4.	A report from the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) in 2005 found that expenditure attributed to immigrants grew by more than the revenue from them, resulting in a negative impact of -£0.4 billion in 2003-4.	pro	During this time period the report found that the UK born population also had a negative fiscal impact, and their impact was higher than the immigrant impact.
during this time period the report found that the uk born population also had a negative fiscal impact, and their impact was higher than the immigrant impact.	1_1.6.9.4.4.4.1.	During this time period the report found that the UK born population also had a negative fiscal impact, and their impact was higher than the immigrant impact.	con	
migrationwatch uk studies show that depending on how you account for dependent children or the elderly, migrants give a negative net contribution.	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.	MigrationWatch UK studies show that depending on how you account for dependent children or the elderly, migrants give a negative net contribution.	pro	If costs from children born to one immigrant and one UK-born parent are shared between both categories, MigrationWatch estimates show that the net fiscal impact of immigrants was negative (-£1 billion for 1999-2000 and -£5 billion for 2003-2004).	A Migration Watch UK paper looking at the 2014/15 period found that if you look at the Working Age population only, the UK-born population was the only group that (out of EEA, Non-EEA, UK Born) did make a positive fiscal contribution.	Migration Watch is an advocacy group that argues for increased restrictions on immigration to the United Kingdom. It is likely to select and report data in a biased fashion.
if costs from children born to one immigrant and one uk-born parent are shared between both categories, migrationwatch estimates show that the net fiscal impact of immigrants was negative (-£1 billion for 1999-2000 and -£5 billion for 2003-2004).	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.1.	If costs from children born to one immigrant and one UK-born parent are shared between both categories, MigrationWatch estimates show that the net fiscal impact of immigrants was negative (-£1 billion for 1999-2000 and -£5 billion for 2003-2004).	pro	These UK born children should count as fully UK born, not half immigrant, because they are UK citizens.	Alternative estimates allocating all children of mixed couples to the immigrant group show the fiscal cost of migrants to be much higher (around -£3.8 billion in 1999-2000).
these uk born children should count as fully uk born, not half immigrant, because they are uk citizens.	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.1.1.	These UK born children should count as fully UK born, not half immigrant, because they are UK citizens.	con	
alternative estimates allocating all children of mixed couples to the immigrant group show the fiscal cost of migrants to be much higher (around -£3.8 billion in 1999-2000).	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.1.2.	Alternative estimates allocating all children of mixed couples to the immigrant group show the fiscal cost of migrants to be much higher (around -£3.8 billion in 1999-2000).	pro	
a migration watch uk paper looking at the 2014/15 period found that if you look at the working age population only, the uk-born population was the only group that (out of eea, non-eea, uk born) did make a positive fiscal contribution.	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.2.	A Migration Watch UK paper looking at the 2014/15 period found that if you look at the Working Age population only, the UK-born population was the only group that (out of EEA, Non-EEA, UK Born) did make a positive fiscal contribution.	pro	It is fairer to look at the whole age range than a narrow one, as increases in dependents/the elderly has a significant effect, and all effects of migration should be considered.
it is fairer to look at the whole age range than a narrow one, as increases in dependents/the elderly has a significant effect, and all effects of migration should be considered.	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.2.1.	It is fairer to look at the whole age range than a narrow one, as increases in dependents/the elderly has a significant effect, and all effects of migration should be considered.	con	
migration watch is an advocacy group that argues for increased restrictions on immigration to the united kingdom. it is likely to select and report data in a biased fashion.	1_1.6.9.4.4.5.3.	Migration Watch is an advocacy group that argues for increased restrictions on immigration to the United Kingdom. It is likely to select and report data in a biased fashion.	con	
hmrc released a report in may 2016, which said that recently arrived eea nationals –those who arrived within the previous 4 years – received £0.56 billion in tax credits and child benefit in the 2013/14 fiscal year but paid £3.11 billion in income taxes and national insurance contributions.	1_1.6.9.4.4.6.	HMRC released a report in May 2016, which said that recently arrived EEA nationals –those who arrived within the previous 4 years – received £0.56 billion in tax credits and Child Benefit in the 2013/14 fiscal year but paid £3.11 billion in income taxes and national insurance contributions.	con	This report ignored taxes like VAT and Council Tax, benefits like Housing Benefit and JSA, and use of a range of public services, and so is not a good indicator of financial cost/benefit.
this report ignored taxes like vat and council tax, benefits like housing benefit and jsa, and use of a range of public services, and so is not a good indicator of financial cost/benefit.	1_1.6.9.4.4.6.1.	This report ignored taxes like VAT and Council Tax, benefits like Housing Benefit and JSA, and use of a range of public services, and so is not a good indicator of financial cost/benefit.	pro	
in 2013 the office for budget responsibility (obr) predicted that in the long term (50 years) higher net immigration would reduce pressure on government debt.	1_1.6.9.4.4.7.	In 2013 the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) predicted that in the long term (50 years) higher net immigration would reduce pressure on government debt.	con	
the oecd found that migration in the uk contributed +0.46% of gdp.	1_1.6.9.4.4.8.	The OECD found that migration in the UK contributed +0.46% of GDP.	con	The UK benefits more than average from migration, receiving +0.11% higher GDP due to migration than the average (+0.35% of GDP).
the uk benefits more than average from migration, receiving +0.11% higher gdp due to migration than the average (+0.35% of gdp).	1_1.6.9.4.4.8.1.	The UK benefits more than average from migration, receiving +0.11% higher GDP due to migration than the average (+0.35% of GDP).	con	
engineered austerity, not immigration, is behind a lack of resources.	1_1.6.9.4.5.	Engineered austerity, not immigration, is behind a lack of resources.	con	Migrants make a positive net contribution to the economy.
our ageing population will not be able to support itself on the tax revenue of the next generation, without attracting an immigrant population of working-age people.	1_1.6.9.4.6.	Our ageing population will not be able to support itself on the tax revenue of the next generation, without attracting an immigrant population of working-age people.	con	
the end of the free movement of people will reduce the supply of labour, damaging the british economy.	1_1.6.9.4.7.	The end of the free movement of people will reduce the supply of labour, damaging the British economy.	con	Skilled foreign workers actually grow British businesses, making them more profitable and leading to further job creation.	Leaving the EU means we could lose over 4,500 NHS nurses, among many other skilled workers that come from the EU.	Migrants make a positive net contribution to the economy.	The UK is one of the least mechanised country in the developed world due to the low cost of immigrant labour. This depresses wages and harms manufacturing output. Lack of immigrant labour would lead to increased mechanisation and the funding of training for employees who would in turn earn more money - thus helping with the gap in wages and cost of living.	EU migrants are younger and more likely to be in work compared to the average member of the population, and so pay more tax and rely on state services less.	UK unemployment is at an all time low, meaning the country is almost at full employment, and therefore the economy will suffer if the labour pool is reduced.	In low-skilled sectors (e.g. hospitality, food processing and construction) employers have difficulty finding British employees and rely on predominantly Eastern European migrant labour (Rolfe, p.51.	Reducing immigration is a political choice that is not necessitated by a hard Brexit.	Although it is generally small, there is a specific downward effect on the wages of unskilled native workers. As they are a vulnerable group, their economic welfare ought to be prioritised.
skilled foreign workers actually grow british businesses, making them more profitable and leading to further job creation.	1_1.6.9.4.7.1.	Skilled foreign workers actually grow British businesses, making them more profitable and leading to further job creation.	con	
leaving the eu means we could lose over 4,500 nhs nurses, among many other skilled workers that come from the eu.	1_1.6.9.4.7.2.	Leaving the EU means we could lose over 4,500 NHS nurses, among many other skilled workers that come from the EU.	con	The expected reduction in the numbers of NHS staff required from the rest of the EU will ensure that the UK government will be forced to reverse decades of decline in the numbers of NHS staff trained within the UK. This will in the long term make the NHS more self-sufficient in staffing, will improve salaries for NHS staff and will improve employment in the country overall.
the expected reduction in the numbers of nhs staff required from the rest of the eu will ensure that the uk government will be forced to reverse decades of decline in the numbers of nhs staff trained within the uk. this will in the long term make the nhs more self-sufficient in staffing, will improve salaries for nhs staff and will improve employment in the country overall.	1_1.6.9.4.7.2.1.	The expected reduction in the numbers of NHS staff required from the rest of the EU will ensure that the UK government will be forced to reverse decades of decline in the numbers of NHS staff trained within the UK. This will in the long term make the NHS more self-sufficient in staffing, will improve salaries for NHS staff and will improve employment in the country overall.	pro	It is untrue that they will be forced to spend more money, when there is a constraint on resources owing to Brexit. It seems more likely that they'll force the NHS to adjust to the lack of money.
it is untrue that they will be forced to spend more money, when there is a constraint on resources owing to brexit. it seems more likely that they'll force the nhs to adjust to the lack of money.	1_1.6.9.4.7.2.1.1.	It is untrue that they will be forced to spend more money, when there is a constraint on resources owing to Brexit. It seems more likely that they'll force the NHS to adjust to the lack of money.	con	
the uk is one of the least mechanised country in the developed world due to the low cost of immigrant labour. this depresses wages and harms manufacturing output. lack of immigrant labour would lead to increased mechanisation and the funding of training for employees who would in turn earn more money - thus helping with the gap in wages and cost of living.	1_1.6.9.4.7.4.	The UK is one of the least mechanised country in the developed world due to the low cost of immigrant labour. This depresses wages and harms manufacturing output. Lack of immigrant labour would lead to increased mechanisation and the funding of training for employees who would in turn earn more money - thus helping with the gap in wages and cost of living.	pro	
uk unemployment is at an all time low, meaning the country is almost at full employment, and therefore the economy will suffer if the labour pool is reduced.	1_1.6.9.4.7.6.	UK unemployment is at an all time low, meaning the country is almost at full employment, and therefore the economy will suffer if the labour pool is reduced.	con	
in low-skilled sectors (e.g. hospitality, food processing and construction) employers have difficulty finding british employees and rely on predominantly eastern european migrant labour (rolfe, p.51.	1_1.6.9.4.7.7.	In low-skilled sectors (e.g. hospitality, food processing and construction) employers have difficulty finding British employees and rely on predominantly Eastern European migrant labour (Rolfe, p.51.	con	
reducing immigration is a political choice that is not necessitated by a hard brexit.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.	Reducing immigration is a political choice that is not necessitated by a hard Brexit.	pro	The point of Brexit is that it will be up to the people, as represented through their MPs, who will decide what sort of immigration system they want; together with the freedom to change it whenever they want into the future.	Consistent polling has shown that a sizable majority believe the UK's immigration levels are too high.	This would allow the UK to implement a merit-based immigration policy which, due to strict policing and mandatory quotas, would be impossible under EU regulations.	Both sides chose to focus on values, not the details of Britain's EU membership. Due to the Leave campaign's focus on immigration policy, immigration became the defining issue of the referendum. This means many people likely made their decision based on the Leave campaign's promises to cut immigration, rather than considering the specifics of EU policy and what leaving actually entailed.	The UK controlling their own immigration policy doesn't necessarily mean it will limit immigration. Perhaps the UK will set such immigration policies as to avoid costs of low immigration or to obtain a free trade agreement with India or Australia.
the point of brexit is that it will be up to the people, as represented through their mps, who will decide what sort of immigration system they want; together with the freedom to change it whenever they want into the future.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.1.	The point of Brexit is that it will be up to the people, as represented through their MPs, who will decide what sort of immigration system they want; together with the freedom to change it whenever they want into the future.	pro	The UK Government has chosen to implement its own interpretation of Brexit. There has been no consultation with the British electorate to debate what kind of immigration system the public wants or what socio-economic costs there would be for doing so.
the uk government has chosen to implement its own interpretation of brexit. there has been no consultation with the british electorate to debate what kind of immigration system the public wants or what socio-economic costs there would be for doing so.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.1.1.	The UK Government has chosen to implement its own interpretation of Brexit. There has been no consultation with the British electorate to debate what kind of immigration system the public wants or what socio-economic costs there would be for doing so.	con	The Government sought a mandate from the electorate based on its manifesto at the last general election, and received it.
the government sought a mandate from the electorate based on its manifesto at the last general election, and received it.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.1.1.1.	The Government sought a mandate from the electorate based on its manifesto at the last general election, and received it.	pro	Theresa May insisted that a vote for the Conservatives was a vote for confidence in her delivering Brexit. She lost numerous seats in the last General Election.
theresa may insisted that a vote for the conservatives was a vote for confidence in her delivering brexit. she lost numerous seats in the last general election.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.1.1.1.1.	Theresa May insisted that a vote for the Conservatives was a vote for confidence in her delivering Brexit. She lost numerous seats in the last General Election.	con	
both sides chose to focus on values, not the details of britain's eu membership. due to the leave campaign's focus on immigration policy, immigration became the defining issue of the referendum. this means many people likely made their decision based on the leave campaign's promises to cut immigration, rather than considering the specifics of eu policy and what leaving actually entailed.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.4.	Both sides chose to focus on values, not the details of Britain's EU membership. Due to the Leave campaign's focus on immigration policy, immigration became the defining issue of the referendum. This means many people likely made their decision based on the Leave campaign's promises to cut immigration, rather than considering the specifics of EU policy and what leaving actually entailed.	con	Ashcroft's poll taken on referendum polling day suggests the single most popular reason for the leave vote was the issue of sovereignty (49%). Since polls taken on election day yield a more representative sample, it is more likely that sovereignty was the defining issue.	Regardless of the defining issue for leave or remain voters (for whom it wasthe risk of leaving to economy, jobs etc., it does not logically follow that EU policy and what leaving actually entailed were not given full consideration by those voters.
ashcroft's poll taken on referendum polling day suggests the single most popular reason for the leave vote was the issue of sovereignty (49%). since polls taken on election day yield a more representative sample, it is more likely that sovereignty was the defining issue.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.4.1.	Ashcroft's poll taken on referendum polling day suggests the single most popular reason for the leave vote was the issue of sovereignty (49%). Since polls taken on election day yield a more representative sample, it is more likely that sovereignty was the defining issue.	pro	Parliamentary sovereignty is a principle of the UK constitution. It makes Parliament the supreme legal authority in the UK, which can create or end any law. Generally, the courts cannot overrule its legislation and no Parliament can pass laws that future Parliaments cannot change. Parliamentary sovereignty is the most important part of the UK constitution. Yet the hard brexiteers want to deprive Parliament of a meaningful vote, thus subverting their sovereignty.	It is hard to separate votes for immigration and votes for sovereignty. Leave politicians insisted that taking back our Sovereignty was a means of restricting immigration by allowing us to "control our borders".
parliamentary sovereignty is a principle of the uk constitution. it makes parliament the supreme legal authority in the uk, which can create or end any law. generally, the courts cannot overrule its legislation and no parliament can pass laws that future parliaments cannot change. parliamentary sovereignty is the most important part of the uk constitution. yet the hard brexiteers want to deprive parliament of a meaningful vote, thus subverting their sovereignty.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.4.1.1.	Parliamentary sovereignty is a principle of the UK constitution. It makes Parliament the supreme legal authority in the UK, which can create or end any law. Generally, the courts cannot overrule its legislation and no Parliament can pass laws that future Parliaments cannot change. Parliamentary sovereignty is the most important part of the UK constitution. Yet the hard brexiteers want to deprive Parliament of a meaningful vote, thus subverting their sovereignty.	con	
it is hard to separate votes for immigration and votes for sovereignty. leave politicians insisted that taking back our sovereignty was a means of restricting immigration by allowing us to "control our borders".	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.4.1.2.	It is hard to separate votes for immigration and votes for sovereignty. Leave politicians insisted that taking back our Sovereignty was a means of restricting immigration by allowing us to "control our borders".	con	
regardless of the defining issue for leave or remain voters (for whom it wasthe risk of leaving to economy, jobs etc., it does not logically follow that eu policy and what leaving actually entailed were not given full consideration by those voters.	1_1.6.9.4.7.8.4.2.	Regardless of the defining issue for leave or remain voters (for whom it wasthe risk of leaving to economy, jobs etc., it does not logically follow that EU policy and what leaving actually entailed were not given full consideration by those voters.	pro	
although it is generally small, there is a specific downward effect on the wages of unskilled native workers. as they are a vulnerable group, their economic welfare ought to be prioritised.	1_1.6.9.4.7.9.	Although it is generally small, there is a specific downward effect on the wages of unskilled native workers. As they are a vulnerable group, their economic welfare ought to be prioritised.	pro	Maybe, instead of paralysing the British economy with a Hard Brexit, the government should invest in high-skills education for those native workers who aren't skilled.	Studies find a correlation between an influx of migrants and lower native wage levels.	Brexit is unlikely to help the most economically disadvantaged.	The economic welfare of the poorest is better served by the increase in tax income that immigration provides overall than by trying to protect them from the small reduction in wages that immigration sometimes causes.	The impact of migration on the wages of the UK-born in the semi-skilled and unskilled sector since 2004 has been about 1 percent, over a period of eight years. This is not only an insignificantly small decrease over a large period of time, it is certainly not something worth trading off the benefits of migration for.
maybe, instead of paralysing the british economy with a hard brexit, the government should invest in high-skills education for those native workers who aren't skilled.	1_1.6.9.4.7.9.1.	Maybe, instead of paralysing the British economy with a Hard Brexit, the government should invest in high-skills education for those native workers who aren't skilled.	con	
brexit is unlikely to help the most economically disadvantaged.	1_1.6.9.4.7.9.3.	Brexit is unlikely to help the most economically disadvantaged.	con	
the economic welfare of the poorest is better served by the increase in tax income that immigration provides overall than by trying to protect them from the small reduction in wages that immigration sometimes causes.	1_1.6.9.4.7.9.4.	The economic welfare of the poorest is better served by the increase in tax income that immigration provides overall than by trying to protect them from the small reduction in wages that immigration sometimes causes.	con	
the brexit campaign resulted in a significant increase of expressions of xenophobia and racism, which may make it harder for the uk to attract foreign workers.	1_1.6.10.	The Brexit campaign resulted in a significant increase of expressions of xenophobia and racism, which may make it harder for the UK to attract foreign workers.	con	The government has a policy of creating a hostile environment for illegal immigrants which will be extended to include EU citizens.	Making it more difficult to attract foreign skilled workers will encourage the public and private sectors to invest more in training UK residents.	An exodus of skilled workers from foreign countries can lead to a brain drain in those countries, negatively affecting their development.	A UN special report said that Brexit has contributed to an environment of increased racial discrimination and intolerance, and has made racial and ethnic minorities more vulnerable to racial discrimination and intolerance.	Police figures obtained through Freedom of Information (FOI) requests show incidents surged by 23 per cent – from 40,741 to 49,921 – in the 11 months after the EU referendum, compared with the same period the previous year. This is the highest spike in religious and racial hate crimes ever recorded.	The UK's Home Office confirmed victims’ reports of a dramatic increase in incidents motivated by attackers’ hostility towards their race, nationality, religion or other factors.	This is a temporary effect, not a long lasting change in UK racism.	Comparing attitudes before and after the referendum from within the same groups of individuals suggests that both Leavers and Remainers have softened in their attitudes towards immigration.	Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Service have warned of a “real possibility” that Britain’s exit from the European Union next year will trigger a spike in hate crimes.
the government has a policy of creating a hostile environment for illegal immigrants which will be extended to include eu citizens.	1_1.6.10.1.	The government has a policy of creating a hostile environment for illegal immigrants which will be extended to include EU citizens.	con	EU citizens who choose to break our laws and come here illegally should find a hostile environment.
eu citizens who choose to break our laws and come here illegally should find a hostile environment.	1_1.6.10.1.1.	EU citizens who choose to break our laws and come here illegally should find a hostile environment.	pro	
making it more difficult to attract foreign skilled workers will encourage the public and private sectors to invest more in training uk residents.	1_1.6.10.2.	Making it more difficult to attract foreign skilled workers will encourage the public and private sectors to invest more in training UK residents.	pro	
an exodus of skilled workers from foreign countries can lead to a brain drain in those countries, negatively affecting their development.	1_1.6.10.3.	An exodus of skilled workers from foreign countries can lead to a brain drain in those countries, negatively affecting their development.	pro	
a un special report said that brexit has contributed to an environment of increased racial discrimination and intolerance, and has made racial and ethnic minorities more vulnerable to racial discrimination and intolerance.	1_1.6.10.4.	A UN special report said that Brexit has contributed to an environment of increased racial discrimination and intolerance, and has made racial and ethnic minorities more vulnerable to racial discrimination and intolerance.	con	
police figures obtained through freedom of information (foi) requests show incidents surged by 23 per cent – from 40,741 to 49,921 – in the 11 months after the eu referendum, compared with the same period the previous year. this is the highest spike in religious and racial hate crimes ever recorded.	1_1.6.10.5.	Police figures obtained through Freedom of Information (FOI) requests show incidents surged by 23 per cent – from 40,741 to 49,921 – in the 11 months after the EU referendum, compared with the same period the previous year. This is the highest spike in religious and racial hate crimes ever recorded.	con	
the uk's home office confirmed victims’ reports of a dramatic increase in incidents motivated by attackers’ hostility towards their race, nationality, religion or other factors.	1_1.6.10.6.	The UK's Home Office confirmed victims’ reports of a dramatic increase in incidents motivated by attackers’ hostility towards their race, nationality, religion or other factors.	con	A home office spokesperson said that the increase was thought to also be due to ongoing improvements in crime recording by the police.
a home office spokesperson said that the increase was thought to also be due to ongoing improvements in crime recording by the police.	1_1.6.10.6.1.	A home office spokesperson said that the increase was thought to also be due to ongoing improvements in crime recording by the police.	pro	
this is a temporary effect, not a long lasting change in uk racism.	1_1.6.10.7.	This is a temporary effect, not a long lasting change in UK racism.	pro	The increase was due to the widespread public debate. Debate will significantly lessen once we leave (or remain), and therefore tension within the British public will lessen.	There has been a large rise in hate crimes against muslims (26% rise in 2017) and people from other non-EU backgrounds. After brexit these groups are not going to decrease in size (if anything we will see a rise in commonwealth migrants) even though the expectation among brexiteers is that migration will fall. This disillusionment quite possibly will lead to further increases in bigotry and racism
the increase was due to the widespread public debate. debate will significantly lessen once we leave (or remain), and therefore tension within the british public will lessen.	1_1.6.10.7.1.	The increase was due to the widespread public debate. Debate will significantly lessen once we leave (or remain), and therefore tension within the British public will lessen.	pro	
there has been a large rise in hate crimes against muslims (26% rise in 2017) and people from other non-eu backgrounds. after brexit these groups are not going to decrease in size (if anything we will see a rise in commonwealth migrants) even though the expectation among brexiteers is that migration will fall. this disillusionment quite possibly will lead to further increases in bigotry and racism	1_1.6.10.7.2.	There has been a large rise in hate crimes against muslims (26% rise in 2017) and people from other non-EU backgrounds. After brexit these groups are not going to decrease in size (if anything we will see a rise in commonwealth migrants) even though the expectation among brexiteers is that migration will fall. This disillusionment quite possibly will lead to further increases in bigotry and racism	con	
her majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary and fire & rescue service have warned of a “real possibility” that britain’s exit from the european union next year will trigger a spike in hate crimes.	1_1.6.10.9.	Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Service have warned of a “real possibility” that Britain’s exit from the European Union next year will trigger a spike in hate crimes.	con	
a hard brexit will negatively affect the national health service.	1_1.7.	A hard Brexit will negatively affect the National Health Service.	con	£20 billion has been pledged to NHS by 2024, funded by money saved from the EU membership.	Theresa May has refused to rule out when asked in Parliament if the NHS would be part of any trade deal discussions with America.	If the UK will regain control over immigration, the demand side of the equation in the health service can be stopped in its increase. Migration is linked to 82% of population growth between 2001 and 2016 - immigrants and their children. 1991 to 2017 estimated net not-British immigration into the UK at 6,076,000.	A clean Brexit would enable the UK to move away from applying competition law to the NHS, something which is currently more difficult due to EU regulations (pg. 4.	A hard Brexit could improve the quality of service provision and medical staff.	Brexit will interfere with the supply of goods for the NHS.	A large number of British pensioners are able to live in Europe and receive healthcare from European systems because of Britain's membership of the EU. If the UK were to leave, some of these pensioners would have to return, costing the NHS (on net) approximately half a billion pounds.	Currently new medicines used in the UK need to be approved by the European Medical Authority. After Brexit the equivalent UK body could be more flexible and fast-track the approval of medicines, which had already been approved by other regulators (including the European and American Authorities).	When the UK tightened its immigration policy for non-EU citizens this had a negative effect on recruitment of hospital staff. It is likely a restriction on EU immigrants would have the same effect.	The Caribbean island of Anguilla is a British Overseas Territory. It relies heavily on access to the neighbouring island of St Maarten, which is a French territory and therefore in the EU, especially for medical care. The islanders' access to healthcare will be devastated in the event of a Hard Brexit, as there are currently no backup plans.
£20 billion has been pledged to nhs by 2024, funded by money saved from the eu membership.	1_1.7.1.	£20 billion has been pledged to NHS by 2024, funded by money saved from the EU membership.	pro	FullFact suggest that none of the £20 billion Brexit dividend will actually come from Brexit savings.	The Brexit dividend will pay the equivalent of £384 million a week, more than the £350 million promised by Vote Leave.	A likely period of economic harm after Brexit may be enough to do permanent damage to the already struggling NHS as well as other public services as Government tax revenues would be hit.
fullfact suggest that none of the £20 billion brexit dividend will actually come from brexit savings.	1_1.7.1.1.	FullFact suggest that none of the £20 billion Brexit dividend will actually come from Brexit savings.	con	
the brexit dividend will pay the equivalent of £384 million a week, more than the £350 million promised by vote leave.	1_1.7.1.2.	The Brexit dividend will pay the equivalent of £384 million a week, more than the £350 million promised by Vote Leave.	pro	The EU membership cost to Britain is £13.1bn a year, or approximately £251m a week. £4.5bn of that fee covers money paid back to Britain for farming subsidies, science research, regeneration grants, etc. Researchers suggest that the loss of trade through a No-Deal Brexit will cost far more than the EU membership fee itself, a total of £58bn a year.	The figures of £350/384 million are intentionally misleading as they do not include the UK's rebate, this amount is never sent to the EU, so should not be considered for any dividend.
the eu membership cost to britain is £13.1bn a year, or approximately £251m a week. £4.5bn of that fee covers money paid back to britain for farming subsidies, science research, regeneration grants, etc. researchers suggest that the loss of trade through a no-deal brexit will cost far more than the eu membership fee itself, a total of £58bn a year.	1_1.7.1.2.1.	The EU membership cost to Britain is £13.1bn a year, or approximately £251m a week. £4.5bn of that fee covers money paid back to Britain for farming subsidies, science research, regeneration grants, etc. Researchers suggest that the loss of trade through a No-Deal Brexit will cost far more than the EU membership fee itself, a total of £58bn a year.	con	
the figures of £350/384 million are intentionally misleading as they do not include the uk's rebate, this amount is never sent to the eu, so should not be considered for any dividend.	1_1.7.1.2.2.	The figures of £350/384 million are intentionally misleading as they do not include the UK's rebate, this amount is never sent to the EU, so should not be considered for any dividend.	con	
a likely period of economic harm after brexit may be enough to do permanent damage to the already struggling nhs as well as other public services as government tax revenues would be hit.	1_1.7.1.3.	A likely period of economic harm after Brexit may be enough to do permanent damage to the already struggling NHS as well as other public services as Government tax revenues would be hit.	con	A hard Brexit will significantly damage the UK economy.
a hard brexit will significantly damage the uk economy.	1_1.7.1.3.1.	A hard Brexit will significantly damage the UK economy.	con	Britain may have to pay a Brexit divorce bill.	Trade deals take time to negotiate. So for a period of some years the UK will not have negotiated trade deals which will impact the economy. At which point with the UK desperate for trade deals in the beginning to limit the impact of WTO tariffs, it will be likely the UK will be negotiating from a position of weakness and will negotiate one sided deals detrimental to the UK.	A Brexit reversal would have a beneficial impact on the UK's economy. This is because it would boost investor certainty in the UK market.	A recent government analysis indicates that UK economy will contract by as much as 9% after no-deal Brexit.	The exceptionally strong performance of the UK economy since the Brexit vote indicates that a hard Brexit will significantly benefit the UK economy.	A hard Brexit will have an adverse impact on our housing market, and interest rates could rise. This could leave people in negative equity with higher mortgage payments, that some may not be able to afford and potentially people having their homes repossessed.	The EU directs considerable investment towards poorer regions of the UK that the national government tends to ignore.	The UK could create a more competitive environment for attracting companies.	The EU is responsible for the funding/loans behind many of the UK's largest infrastructure projects.	The end of the free movement of people will reduce the supply of labour, damaging the British economy.	A hard Brexit would result in short-term regulatory chaos.	The UK would save billions of pounds in annual EU contributions.	Many regions in the UK are economically unaffected by EU membership in the first place. Therefore, a hard Brexit is unlikely to economically damage sizeable parts of the UK economy.	The UK's trading relationship with the EU will become less profitable.	Economic forecasts are inherently unreliable due to the infinite range of variables involved. Given that, it is impossible to accurately predict the economic consequences of Brexit, or whether the UK economy would be better off in or out of the EU.	The UK is too focused on ties to Europe. Diversified international trade deals are more lucrative.	Damage to the UK economy was advised by both side during the campaign, with different degree of the damage, majority decided that other benefits will overbalance short economy disadvantages.
britain may have to pay a brexit divorce bill.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.	Britain may have to pay a Brexit divorce bill.	con	The UK's Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) suggests that Britian will be paying the divorce bill until 2064, with the majority paid by 2021, and the total net estimate at £37.1 billion. (March 2018)	In the event of a no deal brexit, there will be no divorce bill for the UK to pay, as the agreement reached thus far has been "under the caveat that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed."	In December 2017, the British prime minister put forward £39 billion, though recent auditors say "relatively small changes” to government assumptions – on economic performance, ongoing payments into EU schemes or the exchange rate – would throw out the calculation.	The British prime minister said "We will continue to pay our net contributions under the current EU budget plan" but added that that was "conditional upon a number of principles we have negotiated over how we will ultimately arrive at a fair valuation of these commitments" (December 2017).	Article 70 of the Vienna Treaty says a party leaving a treaty has an obligation to existing agreements made before leaving.	If there is no agreement in place at the point of leaving there would be no legal obligation for the UK to make any payment as part of a financial settlement, saving them a large amount of money.
the uk's office for budget responsibility (obr) suggests that britian will be paying the divorce bill until 2064, with the majority paid by 2021, and the total net estimate at £37.1 billion. (march 2018)	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.1.	The UK's Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) suggests that Britian will be paying the divorce bill until 2064, with the majority paid by 2021, and the total net estimate at £37.1 billion. (March 2018)	con	It's the same with a bad internet provider. Sometimes it is better to pay the contract cancellation fee than to use a bad service.	In the budget for financial year 2016–17, proposed total government spending was £772 billion. This should be our perspective. £37.1 Billion sounds like a lot of money, but in 3 years time, it's not that much.
it's the same with a bad internet provider. sometimes it is better to pay the contract cancellation fee than to use a bad service.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.1.1.	It's the same with a bad internet provider. Sometimes it is better to pay the contract cancellation fee than to use a bad service.	pro	
in the budget for financial year 2016–17, proposed total government spending was £772 billion. this should be our perspective. £37.1 billion sounds like a lot of money, but in 3 years time, it's not that much.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.1.2.	In the budget for financial year 2016–17, proposed total government spending was £772 billion. This should be our perspective. £37.1 Billion sounds like a lot of money, but in 3 years time, it's not that much.	pro	
in the event of a no deal brexit, there will be no divorce bill for the uk to pay, as the agreement reached thus far has been "under the caveat that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed."	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.2.	In the event of a no deal brexit, there will be no divorce bill for the UK to pay, as the agreement reached thus far has been "under the caveat that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed."	pro	
in december 2017, the british prime minister put forward £39 billion, though recent auditors say "relatively small changes” to government assumptions – on economic performance, ongoing payments into eu schemes or the exchange rate – would throw out the calculation.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.3.	In December 2017, the British prime minister put forward £39 billion, though recent auditors say "relatively small changes” to government assumptions – on economic performance, ongoing payments into EU schemes or the exchange rate – would throw out the calculation.	con	
the british prime minister said "we will continue to pay our net contributions under the current eu budget plan" but added that that was "conditional upon a number of principles we have negotiated over how we will ultimately arrive at a fair valuation of these commitments" (december 2017).	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.4.	The British prime minister said "We will continue to pay our net contributions under the current EU budget plan" but added that that was "conditional upon a number of principles we have negotiated over how we will ultimately arrive at a fair valuation of these commitments" (December 2017).	pro	
article 70 of the vienna treaty says a party leaving a treaty has an obligation to existing agreements made before leaving.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.	Article 70 of the Vienna Treaty says a party leaving a treaty has an obligation to existing agreements made before leaving.	con	The Vienna Treaty text says  "termination of a treaty" "does not affect any right, obligation or legal situation of the parties created through the execution of the treaty prior to its termination.”	A House of Lords report decided "the meaning of Article 50 TEU, should, as a matter of EU law, be determined in the light of rules laid down in the Vienna Convention" - "Brexit and the EU budget" March 2017.	A House of Lords report "concludes that Article 50 TEU is 'lex specialis', or an exception, expressly mentioned in the first part of Article 70 VCLT. In other words, because the TEU contains a specific provision on withdrawal, Article 70 is irrelevant to the UK’s financial obligations arising out of its EU membership." - "Brexit and the EU budget" March 2017.	Those agreements were made with two major caveats. Firstly, the possibility of leaving the EU with a two year notice period. Second, the expectation of continuing benefits. Art 70 of the Vienna Treaty is therefore (arguably) satisfied without any payment after March 2019 in the event of no deal.
the vienna treaty text says  "termination of a treaty" "does not affect any right, obligation or legal situation of the parties created through the execution of the treaty prior to its termination.”	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.1.	The Vienna Treaty text says  "termination of a treaty" "does not affect any right, obligation or legal situation of the parties created through the execution of the treaty prior to its termination.”	con	If the Vienna Treaty Applies, Brexit is bound by international treaty to pay it's Divorce Bill.
if the vienna treaty applies, brexit is bound by international treaty to pay it's divorce bill.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.1.1.	If the Vienna Treaty Applies, Brexit is bound by international treaty to pay it's Divorce Bill.	con	
a house of lords report decided "the meaning of article 50 teu, should, as a matter of eu law, be determined in the light of rules laid down in the vienna convention" - "brexit and the eu budget" march 2017.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.2.	A House of Lords report decided "the meaning of Article 50 TEU, should, as a matter of EU law, be determined in the light of rules laid down in the Vienna Convention" - "Brexit and the EU budget" March 2017.	con	
a house of lords report "concludes that article 50 teu is 'lex specialis', or an exception, expressly mentioned in the first part of article 70 vclt. in other words, because the teu contains a specific provision on withdrawal, article 70 is irrelevant to the uk’s financial obligations arising out of its eu membership." - "brexit and the eu budget" march 2017.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.3.	A House of Lords report "concludes that Article 50 TEU is 'lex specialis', or an exception, expressly mentioned in the first part of Article 70 VCLT. In other words, because the TEU contains a specific provision on withdrawal, Article 70 is irrelevant to the UK’s financial obligations arising out of its EU membership." - "Brexit and the EU budget" March 2017.	pro	Independent legal analysis has suggested this is incorrect. Article 50 TEU only specifies a specific procedure (the timeline and notification requirements), and does not explicitly specify anything about existing obligations, and so does nothing to overrule the specified existing obligations under Article 70 VCLT.
independent legal analysis has suggested this is incorrect. article 50 teu only specifies a specific procedure (the timeline and notification requirements), and does not explicitly specify anything about existing obligations, and so does nothing to overrule the specified existing obligations under article 70 vclt.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.3.1.	Independent legal analysis has suggested this is incorrect. Article 50 TEU only specifies a specific procedure (the timeline and notification requirements), and does not explicitly specify anything about existing obligations, and so does nothing to overrule the specified existing obligations under Article 70 VCLT.	con	
those agreements were made with two major caveats. firstly, the possibility of leaving the eu with a two year notice period. second, the expectation of continuing benefits. art 70 of the vienna treaty is therefore (arguably) satisfied without any payment after march 2019 in the event of no deal.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.5.4.	Those agreements were made with two major caveats. Firstly, the possibility of leaving the EU with a two year notice period. Second, the expectation of continuing benefits. Art 70 of the Vienna Treaty is therefore (arguably) satisfied without any payment after March 2019 in the event of no deal.	pro	
if there is no agreement in place at the point of leaving there would be no legal obligation for the uk to make any payment as part of a financial settlement, saving them a large amount of money.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.6.	If there is no agreement in place at the point of leaving there would be no legal obligation for the UK to make any payment as part of a financial settlement, saving them a large amount of money.	pro	The UK can leave the EU without a deal and negotiations for a new arrangement can continue. As a deal will last for many years, if not forever, it is critical to obtain a fair deal and not enter into a bad deal .	In the budget for financial year 2016–17, proposed total government spending was £772 billion. This should be our perspective. £37.1 Billion sounds like a lot of money, but in 3 years time, it's not that much.	A part of the financial settlement is finalising EU investment in UK based projects. If the settlement was abandoned, then these projects would have to be finished or, even worse, restarted at the UK taxpayers expense.	Not paying for agreed commitments would destroy goodwill and trust towards the UK, which will diminish our ability to negotiate any beneficial new trade deals, whether with the EU or others.
the uk can leave the eu without a deal and negotiations for a new arrangement can continue. as a deal will last for many years, if not forever, it is critical to obtain a fair deal and not enter into a bad deal .	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.6.1.	The UK can leave the EU without a deal and negotiations for a new arrangement can continue. As a deal will last for many years, if not forever, it is critical to obtain a fair deal and not enter into a bad deal .	pro	
a part of the financial settlement is finalising eu investment in uk based projects. if the settlement was abandoned, then these projects would have to be finished or, even worse, restarted at the uk taxpayers expense.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.6.3.	A part of the financial settlement is finalising EU investment in UK based projects. If the settlement was abandoned, then these projects would have to be finished or, even worse, restarted at the UK taxpayers expense.	con	The European Structural and Investment Fund has€14.2bn of unspent planned UK expenditure with a further €7.3bn of unplanned expenditure to be spent.
the european structural and investment fund has€14.2bn of unspent planned uk expenditure with a further €7.3bn of unplanned expenditure to be spent.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.6.3.1.	The European Structural and Investment Fund has€14.2bn of unspent planned UK expenditure with a further €7.3bn of unplanned expenditure to be spent.	con	
not paying for agreed commitments would destroy goodwill and trust towards the uk, which will diminish our ability to negotiate any beneficial new trade deals, whether with the eu or others.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.6.4.	Not paying for agreed commitments would destroy goodwill and trust towards the UK, which will diminish our ability to negotiate any beneficial new trade deals, whether with the EU or others.	con	If the UK were to leave without a deal it would leave a hole in the EU budget. This would be a better incentive for a trade deal though the amount might be renegotiated depending on the trade deal on offer.
if the uk were to leave without a deal it would leave a hole in the eu budget. this would be a better incentive for a trade deal though the amount might be renegotiated depending on the trade deal on offer.	1_1.7.1.3.1.1.6.4.1.	If the UK were to leave without a deal it would leave a hole in the EU budget. This would be a better incentive for a trade deal though the amount might be renegotiated depending on the trade deal on offer.	pro	
trade deals take time to negotiate. so for a period of some years the uk will not have negotiated trade deals which will impact the economy. at which point with the uk desperate for trade deals in the beginning to limit the impact of wto tariffs, it will be likely the uk will be negotiating from a position of weakness and will negotiate one sided deals detrimental to the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.	Trade deals take time to negotiate. So for a period of some years the UK will not have negotiated trade deals which will impact the economy. At which point with the UK desperate for trade deals in the beginning to limit the impact of WTO tariffs, it will be likely the UK will be negotiating from a position of weakness and will negotiate one sided deals detrimental to the UK.	con	In the event of a hard Brexit, Britain will overnight be excluded from EU arrangements with “third countries”, or non-EU countries, entering the equivalent of a legal void in key parts of its external commercial relations. This exclusion will mean that the UK will have to renegotiate 759 treaties.
in the event of a hard brexit, britain will overnight be excluded from eu arrangements with “third countries”, or non-eu countries, entering the equivalent of a legal void in key parts of its external commercial relations. this exclusion will mean that the uk will have to renegotiate 759 treaties.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.	In the event of a hard Brexit, Britain will overnight be excluded from EU arrangements with “third countries”, or non-EU countries, entering the equivalent of a legal void in key parts of its external commercial relations. This exclusion will mean that the UK will have to renegotiate 759 treaties.	con	The UK will still be able to trade under WTO rules with countries whilst setting up (hopefully more beneficial) trade agreements with various nations.	295 of these treaties are trade treaties, leaving in limbo countless businesses who will not know what rules govern trading relations between the UK and other countries.	Each agreement has to be reviewed, the country approached, the decision makers found, meetings arranged, trips made, negotiations started and completed. This will take up considerable time and resources of the British government, where some treaties may not be negotiated in time for Brexit.	Multi-lateral agreements based on consensus also need to be renegotiated, where Britain must re-approach 132 separate parties.	The UK is trying to secure transition agreements that will minimise disruption to trade after Brexit, allowing breathing room for old deals to be renegotiated and new ones to be made.
the uk will still be able to trade under wto rules with countries whilst setting up (hopefully more beneficial) trade agreements with various nations.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.1.	The UK will still be able to trade under WTO rules with countries whilst setting up (hopefully more beneficial) trade agreements with various nations.	pro	The WTO has stated that it is not realistic to start trading on WTO terms immediately after Brexit.
the wto has stated that it is not realistic to start trading on wto terms immediately after brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.1.1.	The WTO has stated that it is not realistic to start trading on WTO terms immediately after Brexit.	con	Britain can negotiate its relationship with the EU whilst still being a member.
britain can negotiate its relationship with the eu whilst still being a member.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.1.1.1.	Britain can negotiate its relationship with the EU whilst still being a member.	pro	Britain could negotiate their status, if they had the slightest clue of what their negotiating stance should be. Sadly they do not.
britain could negotiate their status, if they had the slightest clue of what their negotiating stance should be. sadly they do not.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.	Britain could negotiate their status, if they had the slightest clue of what their negotiating stance should be. Sadly they do not.	con	
295 of these treaties are trade treaties, leaving in limbo countless businesses who will not know what rules govern trading relations between the uk and other countries.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.2.	295 of these treaties are trade treaties, leaving in limbo countless businesses who will not know what rules govern trading relations between the UK and other countries.	con	
each agreement has to be reviewed, the country approached, the decision makers found, meetings arranged, trips made, negotiations started and completed. this will take up considerable time and resources of the british government, where some treaties may not be negotiated in time for brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.3.	Each agreement has to be reviewed, the country approached, the decision makers found, meetings arranged, trips made, negotiations started and completed. This will take up considerable time and resources of the British government, where some treaties may not be negotiated in time for Brexit.	con	Many countries want to know the outcome of EU-UK talks before making their own commitments to the UK, ensuring that their won't in fact be treaties signed with some non-EU nations by the time a hard Brexit occurs.
many countries want to know the outcome of eu-uk talks before making their own commitments to the uk, ensuring that their won't in fact be treaties signed with some non-eu nations by the time a hard brexit occurs.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.3.1.	Many countries want to know the outcome of EU-UK talks before making their own commitments to the UK, ensuring that their won't in fact be treaties signed with some non-EU nations by the time a hard Brexit occurs.	con	
multi-lateral agreements based on consensus also need to be renegotiated, where britain must re-approach 132 separate parties.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.4.	Multi-lateral agreements based on consensus also need to be renegotiated, where Britain must re-approach 132 separate parties.	con	
the uk is trying to secure transition agreements that will minimise disruption to trade after brexit, allowing breathing room for old deals to be renegotiated and new ones to be made.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.5.	The UK is trying to secure transition agreements that will minimise disruption to trade after Brexit, allowing breathing room for old deals to be renegotiated and new ones to be made.	pro	The UK has secured a one year transitional period  (Brexit day to 31 December 2020).	There will not be any automatic roll-over of EU trade deals for the UK during the post-Brexit transition period, unless the EU negotiates them individually with non-EU states. It is unlikely the EU will taken on this burden, or be able to complete the negotiations for all the treaties in the limited time remaining.
the uk has secured a one year transitional period  (brexit day to 31 december 2020).	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.5.1.	The UK has secured a one year transitional period  (Brexit day to 31 December 2020).	pro	The EU27 may extend the transition period and require Britain to refrain from implementing any independent trade deals for two years after Brexit.
the eu27 may extend the transition period and require britain to refrain from implementing any independent trade deals for two years after brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.5.1.1.	The EU27 may extend the transition period and require Britain to refrain from implementing any independent trade deals for two years after Brexit.	con	
there will not be any automatic roll-over of eu trade deals for the uk during the post-brexit transition period, unless the eu negotiates them individually with non-eu states. it is unlikely the eu will taken on this burden, or be able to complete the negotiations for all the treaties in the limited time remaining.	1_1.7.1.3.1.2.1.5.2.	There will not be any automatic roll-over of EU trade deals for the UK during the post-Brexit transition period, unless the EU negotiates them individually with non-EU states. It is unlikely the EU will taken on this burden, or be able to complete the negotiations for all the treaties in the limited time remaining.	con	
a brexit reversal would have a beneficial impact on the uk's economy. this is because it would boost investor certainty in the uk market.	1_1.7.1.3.1.3.	A Brexit reversal would have a beneficial impact on the UK's economy. This is because it would boost investor certainty in the UK market.	con	
a recent government analysis indicates that uk economy will contract by as much as 9% after no-deal brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.4.	A recent government analysis indicates that UK economy will contract by as much as 9% after no-deal Brexit.	con	
the exceptionally strong performance of the uk economy since the brexit vote indicates that a hard brexit will significantly benefit the uk economy.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.	The exceptionally strong performance of the UK economy since the Brexit vote indicates that a hard Brexit will significantly benefit the UK economy.	pro	Since the announcement of Brexit the value of the pound has dropped.	UK wage growth is at the fastest level since 2008, far outstripping inflation, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	The UK employment rate has hit a record high of 75.8%, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	The UK economy grew at 1.3% in 2018 (comparing Q4 2018 to Q4 2017), faster than that of Germany (0.6%) or France (0.9%), confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	The UK unemployment is below 4% for the first time since 1975, 3 years after the vote to leave the EU, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	Brexit hasn't happened yet.	The value of UK exports has increased markedly by over 20% in just 2.5 years since the Brexit vote, whereas the value of exports was flat for the preceding four years.	UK government 10 year borrowing costs are at historically low rates, currently just 1.01% and down 0.3 points on a year ago, indicating that the market is extremely confident in UK government finances and is unconcerned by any risk associated with a hard Brexit.	Not everyone agrees that the UK's economic performance has been exceptional.	Economic effects are not always immediate. The likely loss of single market and passporting rights has caused investment in the UK economy to drop by around £300B a year already, even before leaving the EU. This will not be felt immediately, but will have harmful long term consequences on productivity and growth.	There is now a long and expanding list of major employers leaving the UK due to brexit. These include, but are not limited to: Barclays, Dyson, Honda, HSBC, Lloyds of London, Moneygram, P&O, Nissan, Sony, Panasonic, Airbus, JPMorgan, Toyota. To claim this will lead to economic benefits is not credible.	$1 trillion of financial assets are leaving Britain because of Brexit. This will significantly harm the Exchequer's ability to tax the financial industry, which makes up a large proportion of the UK tax base.
since the announcement of brexit the value of the pound has dropped.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.	Since the announcement of Brexit the value of the pound has dropped.	con	The weaker pound will make British exports more competitive.	Should a hard brexit actually pass, several experts predict the pound may come under further pressure.	Increased import prices that come with currency depreciation harm the British consumer as the UK economy relies on imports.
the weaker pound will make british exports more competitive.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.	The weaker pound will make British exports more competitive.	pro	However, with hard Brexit there will be a lack of involvement in the free market. This would mean decreased exports to EU countries due to less benefits and thus increased costs.	The UK is a net importer with the EU. Imports exceeded exports by £7.6 billion in April 2018.	Currency depreciation also makes UK produced products more expensive as many of them are deeply integrated in foreign supply chains and need foreign imported inputs to produce. When sterling depreciates and import prices rise, the effect on export prices renders them less competitive.
however, with hard brexit there will be a lack of involvement in the free market. this would mean decreased exports to eu countries due to less benefits and thus increased costs.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.	However, with hard Brexit there will be a lack of involvement in the free market. This would mean decreased exports to EU countries due to less benefits and thus increased costs.	con	With no new trade agreement with the EU, the rules of the World Trade Organisation would apply. Tariffs would be imposed on goods that the UK sends to the EU, which would negatively affect many British companies who rely on this trade.
with no new trade agreement with the eu, the rules of the world trade organisation would apply. tariffs would be imposed on goods that the uk sends to the eu, which would negatively affect many british companies who rely on this trade.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.	With no new trade agreement with the EU, the rules of the World Trade Organisation would apply. Tariffs would be imposed on goods that the UK sends to the EU, which would negatively affect many British companies who rely on this trade.	con	British farmers would face 30-40 per cent charges for exporting to the EU. This would be a huge blow to agriculture in Britain.	Entering into WTO would provide us with the same access to Europe as other non-European countries and any negotiations with regards specific tariffs would be scheduled later as we'd continue on current values. Going WTO is a scaremonger story and the reality is we import more than too Europe, WTO negotiations would be in our favour.ukandeu.ac.uk	Continued EU membership guarantees the long term security of food.	UK trades internationally under EU WTO schedules and quotas, a Hard-Brexit will require immediate implementation of a UK WTO Schedule and Quota. This does not exist and could take a long time to agree.	In the absence of any agreement with the EU, imports from the EU will raise £12.9bn for the UK Treasury in duties, whilst UK exporters will face £5.2bn in total in tariffs on their exports to the EU. blogs.lse.ac.uk	Car industry analysis suggests that EU tariffs on cars alone could add £1.8 billion to the cost of exporting UK cars to the EU, decreasing UK competitiveness in the European market.	Reciprocal tariffs imposed on goods the EU sends to the UK would protect some British industries, contributing to economic growth.	As Britain comprises 16% of EU GDP, reciprocal tariffs would hurt EU businesses as well, incentivising the agreement of sector-specific trade deals.	75% of British fish is exported. Leaving the EU would put Britain in a position similar to Norway, which is subject to tariffs on exported fish, and has described this as a 'serious obstacle to trade'.
british farmers would face 30-40 per cent charges for exporting to the eu. this would be a huge blow to agriculture in britain.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.	British farmers would face 30-40 per cent charges for exporting to the EU. This would be a huge blow to agriculture in Britain.	con	Part of the reason UK farmers are so reliant on EU markets is because the protectionist nature of the EU bloc means that reciprocal tariffs or strict quotas are in place with many other countries.
part of the reason uk farmers are so reliant on eu markets is because the protectionist nature of the eu bloc means that reciprocal tariffs or strict quotas are in place with many other countries.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.	Part of the reason UK farmers are so reliant on EU markets is because the protectionist nature of the EU bloc means that reciprocal tariffs or strict quotas are in place with many other countries.	pro	Mark Manger and Atom Vayalinkal (of the London School of Economics), who have compared tariff data for Australia, Canada, the EU, Japan, the UK and the US, reach a different conclusion. On manufactured goods the EU has the second-lowest tariffs after Japan. On agricultural products Japan has the highest tariffs, followed by the US.	The European Union is one of the most open economies in the world and is committed to free trade.
mark manger and atom vayalinkal (of the london school of economics), who have compared tariff data for australia, canada, the eu, japan, the uk and the us, reach a different conclusion. on manufactured goods the eu has the second-lowest tariffs after japan. on agricultural products japan has the highest tariffs, followed by the us.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.	Mark Manger and Atom Vayalinkal (of the London School of Economics), who have compared tariff data for Australia, Canada, the EU, Japan, the UK and the US, reach a different conclusion. On manufactured goods the EU has the second-lowest tariffs after Japan. On agricultural products Japan has the highest tariffs, followed by the US.	con	Looking at average tariffs as Manger and Vayalinkal have done can disguise the true picture, as tariffs are only one of the ways in which protectionist entities like the EU and US restrict trade, and specific tariffs still cause harm, as explained by Rolf Langhammer and Kevin Dowd.
looking at average tariffs as manger and vayalinkal have done can disguise the true picture, as tariffs are only one of the ways in which protectionist entities like the eu and us restrict trade, and specific tariffs still cause harm, as explained by rolf langhammer and kevin dowd.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.	Looking at average tariffs as Manger and Vayalinkal have done can disguise the true picture, as tariffs are only one of the ways in which protectionist entities like the EU and US restrict trade, and specific tariffs still cause harm, as explained by Rolf Langhammer and Kevin Dowd.	pro	
the european union is one of the most open economies in the world and is committed to free trade.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.2.	The European Union is one of the most open economies in the world and is committed to free trade.	con	European Union Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom has unveiled a blueprint for a free-trade deal with the U.S, saying that “While we are talking, we should not impose any tariffs on each other”.	The average applied tariff for goods imported into the EU is very low. More than 70% of imports enter the EU at zero or reduced tariffs.	The EU has over 35 free trade agreements with 62 partner countries, and the pace of new FTAs in increasing.
european union trade commissioner cecilia malmstrom has unveiled a blueprint for a free-trade deal with the u.s, saying that “while we are talking, we should not impose any tariffs on each other”.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.2.1.	European Union Trade Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom has unveiled a blueprint for a free-trade deal with the U.S, saying that “While we are talking, we should not impose any tariffs on each other”.	con	
the average applied tariff for goods imported into the eu is very low. more than 70% of imports enter the eu at zero or reduced tariffs.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.2.2.	The average applied tariff for goods imported into the EU is very low. More than 70% of imports enter the EU at zero or reduced tariffs.	con	
the eu has over 35 free trade agreements with 62 partner countries, and the pace of new ftas in increasing.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.1.1.2.3.	The EU has over 35 free trade agreements with 62 partner countries, and the pace of new FTAs in increasing.	con	
entering into wto would provide us with the same access to europe as other non-european countries and any negotiations with regards specific tariffs would be scheduled later as we'd continue on current values. going wto is a scaremonger story and the reality is we import more than too europe, wto negotiations would be in our favour.ukandeu.ac.uk	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.2.	Entering into WTO would provide us with the same access to Europe as other non-European countries and any negotiations with regards specific tariffs would be scheduled later as we'd continue on current values. Going WTO is a scaremonger story and the reality is we import more than too Europe, WTO negotiations would be in our favour.ukandeu.ac.uk	pro	
continued eu membership guarantees the long term security of food.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.3.	Continued EU membership guarantees the long term security of food.	con	
uk trades internationally under eu wto schedules and quotas, a hard-brexit will require immediate implementation of a uk wto schedule and quota. this does not exist and could take a long time to agree.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.4.	UK trades internationally under EU WTO schedules and quotas, a Hard-Brexit will require immediate implementation of a UK WTO Schedule and Quota. This does not exist and could take a long time to agree.	con	
in the absence of any agreement with the eu, imports from the eu will raise £12.9bn for the uk treasury in duties, whilst uk exporters will face £5.2bn in total in tariffs on their exports to the eu. blogs.lse.ac.uk	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.5.	In the absence of any agreement with the EU, imports from the EU will raise £12.9bn for the UK Treasury in duties, whilst UK exporters will face £5.2bn in total in tariffs on their exports to the EU. blogs.lse.ac.uk	pro	
car industry analysis suggests that eu tariffs on cars alone could add £1.8 billion to the cost of exporting uk cars to the eu, decreasing uk competitiveness in the european market.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.6.	Car industry analysis suggests that EU tariffs on cars alone could add £1.8 billion to the cost of exporting UK cars to the EU, decreasing UK competitiveness in the European market.	con	The UK manufactures enough cars domestically that British citizens will not have a problem.	Cars manufactured in the UK by EU companies will suffer from tariffs and delays on parts, which could make it more expensive and logistically more difficult than to manufacture the cars on the continent and then take just a single tariff and delay to sell to the UK. This could result in the shutdown of plants in the UK owned by EU companies and a consequential loss in jobs.
the uk manufactures enough cars domestically that british citizens will not have a problem.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.6.1.	The UK manufactures enough cars domestically that British citizens will not have a problem.	pro	Only a tiny fraction of these are made by British-owned companies. The bulk are made by companies which are pulling out because of Brexit.
only a tiny fraction of these are made by british-owned companies. the bulk are made by companies which are pulling out because of brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.6.1.1.	Only a tiny fraction of these are made by British-owned companies. The bulk are made by companies which are pulling out because of Brexit.	con	Cars are bad anyway. Good riddance.
cars are bad anyway. good riddance.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.6.1.1.1.	Cars are bad anyway. Good riddance.	pro	
cars manufactured in the uk by eu companies will suffer from tariffs and delays on parts, which could make it more expensive and logistically more difficult than to manufacture the cars on the continent and then take just a single tariff and delay to sell to the uk. this could result in the shutdown of plants in the uk owned by eu companies and a consequential loss in jobs.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.6.2.	Cars manufactured in the UK by EU companies will suffer from tariffs and delays on parts, which could make it more expensive and logistically more difficult than to manufacture the cars on the continent and then take just a single tariff and delay to sell to the UK. This could result in the shutdown of plants in the UK owned by EU companies and a consequential loss in jobs.	pro	
reciprocal tariffs imposed on goods the eu sends to the uk would protect some british industries, contributing to economic growth.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.7.	Reciprocal tariffs imposed on goods the EU sends to the UK would protect some British industries, contributing to economic growth.	pro	The UK is a net importer with the EU. Imports exceeded exports by £7.6 billion in April 2018.
the uk is a net importer with the eu. imports exceeded exports by £7.6 billion in april 2018.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.7.1.	The UK is a net importer with the EU. Imports exceeded exports by £7.6 billion in April 2018.	con	
as britain comprises 16% of eu gdp, reciprocal tariffs would hurt eu businesses as well, incentivising the agreement of sector-specific trade deals.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.8.	As Britain comprises 16% of EU GDP, reciprocal tariffs would hurt EU businesses as well, incentivising the agreement of sector-specific trade deals.	pro	
75% of british fish is exported. leaving the eu would put britain in a position similar to norway, which is subject to tariffs on exported fish, and has described this as a 'serious obstacle to trade'.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.9.	75% of British fish is exported. Leaving the EU would put Britain in a position similar to Norway, which is subject to tariffs on exported fish, and has described this as a 'serious obstacle to trade'.	con	Such a high level of exported fish indicates how in demand British fish is in the EU. The imposition of tariffs will hurt EU consumers first and foremost.
such a high level of exported fish indicates how in demand british fish is in the eu. the imposition of tariffs will hurt eu consumers first and foremost.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.9.1.	Such a high level of exported fish indicates how in demand British fish is in the EU. The imposition of tariffs will hurt EU consumers first and foremost.	pro	Trade is not zero-sum: it is possible for tariffs to hurt both the exporter and the importer, and therefore both the UK and the EU.
trade is not zero-sum: it is possible for tariffs to hurt both the exporter and the importer, and therefore both the uk and the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.9.1.1.	Trade is not zero-sum: it is possible for tariffs to hurt both the exporter and the importer, and therefore both the UK and the EU.	con	This would illustrate that the EU as a political organisation is willing to hurt its own citizens in order to protect its own narrow interests, which is a good argument in itself for the UK leaving such a spiteful club.
this would illustrate that the eu as a political organisation is willing to hurt its own citizens in order to protect its own narrow interests, which is a good argument in itself for the uk leaving such a spiteful club.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.1.1.9.1.1.1.	This would illustrate that the EU as a political organisation is willing to hurt its own citizens in order to protect its own narrow interests, which is a good argument in itself for the UK leaving such a spiteful club.	pro	
currency depreciation also makes uk produced products more expensive as many of them are deeply integrated in foreign supply chains and need foreign imported inputs to produce. when sterling depreciates and import prices rise, the effect on export prices renders them less competitive.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.1.3.	Currency depreciation also makes UK produced products more expensive as many of them are deeply integrated in foreign supply chains and need foreign imported inputs to produce. When sterling depreciates and import prices rise, the effect on export prices renders them less competitive.	con	
should a hard brexit actually pass, several experts predict the pound may come under further pressure.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.2.	Should a hard brexit actually pass, several experts predict the pound may come under further pressure.	con	
increased import prices that come with currency depreciation harm the british consumer as the uk economy relies on imports.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.1.3.	Increased import prices that come with currency depreciation harm the British consumer as the UK economy relies on imports.	con	
uk wage growth is at the fastest level since 2008, far outstripping inflation, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.2.	UK wage growth is at the fastest level since 2008, far outstripping inflation, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	pro	
the uk employment rate has hit a record high of 75.8%, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.3.	The UK employment rate has hit a record high of 75.8%, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	pro	
the uk economy grew at 1.3% in 2018 (comparing q4 2018 to q4 2017), faster than that of germany (0.6%) or france (0.9%), confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.	The UK economy grew at 1.3% in 2018 (comparing Q4 2018 to Q4 2017), faster than that of Germany (0.6%) or France (0.9%), confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	pro	Brexit hasn't happened yet.
brexit hasn't happened yet.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.1.	Brexit hasn't happened yet.	con	Brexit is a process. Economic predictions were for catastrophe as soon as a pro-Brexit vote happened. These were clearly not just wrong, but in many cases, e.g. employment and public finances, the opposite of what has happened.	Businesses cite uncertainty as the biggest economic inhibitor. The post-referendum period has seen the most uncertainty from a policy perspective over a hard brexit. The fact that the economy is doing so well despite this uncertainty indicates a hard brexit holds nothing to fear.
brexit is a process. economic predictions were for catastrophe as soon as a pro-brexit vote happened. these were clearly not just wrong, but in many cases, e.g. employment and public finances, the opposite of what has happened.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.1.1.	Brexit is a process. Economic predictions were for catastrophe as soon as a pro-Brexit vote happened. These were clearly not just wrong, but in many cases, e.g. employment and public finances, the opposite of what has happened.	pro	Let's not conflate the process of forming any leaving deal with the implementation itself which is not a process.
let's not conflate the process of forming any leaving deal with the implementation itself which is not a process.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.1.1.1.	Let's not conflate the process of forming any leaving deal with the implementation itself which is not a process.	con	
businesses cite uncertainty as the biggest economic inhibitor. the post-referendum period has seen the most uncertainty from a policy perspective over a hard brexit. the fact that the economy is doing so well despite this uncertainty indicates a hard brexit holds nothing to fear.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.1.2.	Businesses cite uncertainty as the biggest economic inhibitor. The post-referendum period has seen the most uncertainty from a policy perspective over a hard brexit. The fact that the economy is doing so well despite this uncertainty indicates a hard brexit holds nothing to fear.	pro	Not all commentators are convinced the economy is doing as well as claimed.
not all commentators are convinced the economy is doing as well as claimed.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.1.2.1.	Not all commentators are convinced the economy is doing as well as claimed.	con	The CBI doesn't want no deal.
the cbi doesn't want no deal.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.4.1.2.1.1.	The CBI doesn't want no deal.	con	
the uk unemployment is below 4% for the first time since 1975, 3 years after the vote to leave the eu, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.5.	The UK unemployment is below 4% for the first time since 1975, 3 years after the vote to leave the EU, confounding the pre-referendum pessimistic forecasts.	pro	
the value of uk exports has increased markedly by over 20% in just 2.5 years since the brexit vote, whereas the value of exports was flat for the preceding four years.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.7.	The value of UK exports has increased markedly by over 20% in just 2.5 years since the Brexit vote, whereas the value of exports was flat for the preceding four years.	pro	
uk government 10 year borrowing costs are at historically low rates, currently just 1.01% and down 0.3 points on a year ago, indicating that the market is extremely confident in uk government finances and is unconcerned by any risk associated with a hard brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.8.	UK government 10 year borrowing costs are at historically low rates, currently just 1.01% and down 0.3 points on a year ago, indicating that the market is extremely confident in UK government finances and is unconcerned by any risk associated with a hard Brexit.	pro	Some commentators think that low interest rates reflect the Bank of England's concerns regarding the economy.	The last time the UK’s 10-year gilt yield fell to a historic low was in the midst of the eurozone debt crisis in 2012.
some commentators think that low interest rates reflect the bank of england's concerns regarding the economy.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.8.1.	Some commentators think that low interest rates reflect the Bank of England's concerns regarding the economy.	con	
the last time the uk’s 10-year gilt yield fell to a historic low was in the midst of the eurozone debt crisis in 2012.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.8.2.	The last time the UK’s 10-year gilt yield fell to a historic low was in the midst of the eurozone debt crisis in 2012.	con	
not everyone agrees that the uk's economic performance has been exceptional.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.9.	Not everyone agrees that the UK's economic performance has been exceptional.	con	
economic effects are not always immediate. the likely loss of single market and passporting rights has caused investment in the uk economy to drop by around £300b a year already, even before leaving the eu. this will not be felt immediately, but will have harmful long term consequences on productivity and growth.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.10.	Economic effects are not always immediate. The likely loss of single market and passporting rights has caused investment in the UK economy to drop by around £300B a year already, even before leaving the EU. This will not be felt immediately, but will have harmful long term consequences on productivity and growth.	con	
there is now a long and expanding list of major employers leaving the uk due to brexit. these include, but are not limited to: barclays, dyson, honda, hsbc, lloyds of london, moneygram, p&o, nissan, sony, panasonic, airbus, jpmorgan, toyota. to claim this will lead to economic benefits is not credible.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.11.	There is now a long and expanding list of major employers leaving the UK due to brexit. These include, but are not limited to: Barclays, Dyson, Honda, HSBC, Lloyds of London, Moneygram, P&O, Nissan, Sony, Panasonic, Airbus, JPMorgan, Toyota. To claim this will lead to economic benefits is not credible.	con	
$1 trillion of financial assets are leaving britain because of brexit. this will significantly harm the exchequer's ability to tax the financial industry, which makes up a large proportion of the uk tax base.	1_1.7.1.3.1.5.12.	$1 trillion of financial assets are leaving Britain because of Brexit. This will significantly harm the Exchequer's ability to tax the financial industry, which makes up a large proportion of the UK tax base.	con	
a hard brexit will have an adverse impact on our housing market, and interest rates could rise. this could leave people in negative equity with higher mortgage payments, that some may not be able to afford and potentially people having their homes repossessed.	1_1.7.1.3.1.6.	A hard Brexit will have an adverse impact on our housing market, and interest rates could rise. This could leave people in negative equity with higher mortgage payments, that some may not be able to afford and potentially people having their homes repossessed.	con	There are consistent complaints that prices are too high for young people to get on the property ladder, and for them this would be seen as a positive effect on the housing market.
there are consistent complaints that prices are too high for young people to get on the property ladder, and for them this would be seen as a positive effect on the housing market.	1_1.7.1.3.1.6.1.	There are consistent complaints that prices are too high for young people to get on the property ladder, and for them this would be seen as a positive effect on the housing market.	pro	Brexit is a brilliant idea if you're a disaster capitalist.	Most people would not describe the financial ruin of potentially hundreds of thousands of households as a positive effect on the housing market, even if it meant they could milk the despair of their fellow man for quick profit.
brexit is a brilliant idea if you're a disaster capitalist.	1_1.7.1.3.1.6.1.1.	Brexit is a brilliant idea if you're a disaster capitalist.	pro	
most people would not describe the financial ruin of potentially hundreds of thousands of households as a positive effect on the housing market, even if it meant they could milk the despair of their fellow man for quick profit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.6.1.2.	Most people would not describe the financial ruin of potentially hundreds of thousands of households as a positive effect on the housing market, even if it meant they could milk the despair of their fellow man for quick profit.	con	
the eu directs considerable investment towards poorer regions of the uk that the national government tends to ignore.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.	The EU directs considerable investment towards poorer regions of the UK that the national government tends to ignore.	con	The British government spends significantly more money on transport infrastructure per head in London than anywhere else in the UK.	The European Investment Bank is the largest multilateral investment bank in the world (bigger than the World Bank), and lent 36 billion euros between 2011 and 2016 to British institutions, with less developed areas (particularly in West Wales and the South West of England) receiving more per person than other areas.
the british government spends significantly more money on transport infrastructure per head in london than anywhere else in the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.1.	The British government spends significantly more money on transport infrastructure per head in London than anywhere else in the UK.	con	This is because the London area has the oldest rail network, and is subject to the most strain with the largest population increase and thus increase in usage, of any location in the UK. Plus the fragmented nature of the network pushes up costs - London is the hub where a lot of this fragmentation meets.
this is because the london area has the oldest rail network, and is subject to the most strain with the largest population increase and thus increase in usage, of any location in the uk. plus the fragmented nature of the network pushes up costs - london is the hub where a lot of this fragmentation meets.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.1.1.	This is because the London area has the oldest rail network, and is subject to the most strain with the largest population increase and thus increase in usage, of any location in the UK. Plus the fragmented nature of the network pushes up costs - London is the hub where a lot of this fragmentation meets.	pro	London does not have the UK's oldest train network. The rail networks around Liverpool, Manchester and most of Scotland are significantly older.	London's rail network is fragmented because it is run by 38 separate private contractors.	Geographically, London is in no way the nexus point for the British railway. It is only the centre of this matrix by choice, not divine, immutable intervention.
london does not have the uk's oldest train network. the rail networks around liverpool, manchester and most of scotland are significantly older.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.1.1.1.	London does not have the UK's oldest train network. The rail networks around Liverpool, Manchester and most of Scotland are significantly older.	con	
london's rail network is fragmented because it is run by 38 separate private contractors.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.1.1.2.	London's rail network is fragmented because it is run by 38 separate private contractors.	pro	
geographically, london is in no way the nexus point for the british railway. it is only the centre of this matrix by choice, not divine, immutable intervention.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.1.1.3.	Geographically, London is in no way the nexus point for the British railway. It is only the centre of this matrix by choice, not divine, immutable intervention.	con	
the european investment bank is the largest multilateral investment bank in the world (bigger than the world bank), and lent 36 billion euros between 2011 and 2016 to british institutions, with less developed areas (particularly in west wales and the south west of england) receiving more per person than other areas.	1_1.7.1.3.1.7.2.	The European Investment Bank is the largest multilateral investment bank in the world (bigger than the World Bank), and lent 36 billion euros between 2011 and 2016 to British institutions, with less developed areas (particularly in West Wales and the South West of England) receiving more per person than other areas.	con	
the uk could create a more competitive environment for attracting companies.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.	The UK could create a more competitive environment for attracting companies.	pro	Many companies are leaving or thinking about leaving the UK.	The EU mandates that the UK not have less than a 15% VAT. Once free from these regulations the UK could lower this and gain a competitive advantage to encourage growth and investment.	It has been proposed that the UK could form a commission to cut back on EU regulations post Brexit by almost a quarter. This would save the UK between £33 billion ($43 billion) and £140 billion ($182 billion) annually and bring more industry and investment into the UK.	The UK is already a competitive market for companies under the status quo. Trade barriers will only harm this.
many companies are leaving or thinking about leaving the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.1.	Many companies are leaving or thinking about leaving the UK.	con	Even the pro-Brexit 'traitor' bashing Daily Mail is quietly considering moving to its Irish offices in Dublin to continue enjoying the benefits of EU membership.
even the pro-brexit 'traitor' bashing daily mail is quietly considering moving to its irish offices in dublin to continue enjoying the benefits of eu membership.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.1.1.	Even the pro-Brexit 'traitor' bashing Daily Mail is quietly considering moving to its Irish offices in Dublin to continue enjoying the benefits of EU membership.	con	
the eu mandates that the uk not have less than a 15% vat. once free from these regulations the uk could lower this and gain a competitive advantage to encourage growth and investment.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.2.	The EU mandates that the UK not have less than a 15% VAT. Once free from these regulations the UK could lower this and gain a competitive advantage to encourage growth and investment.	pro	As UK VAT currently stands at 20%, there was room for the Government to lower the tax without exiting the EU.
as uk vat currently stands at 20%, there was room for the government to lower the tax without exiting the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.2.1.	As UK VAT currently stands at 20%, there was room for the Government to lower the tax without exiting the EU.	con	
it has been proposed that the uk could form a commission to cut back on eu regulations post brexit by almost a quarter. this would save the uk between £33 billion ($43 billion) and £140 billion ($182 billion) annually and bring more industry and investment into the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.3.	It has been proposed that the UK could form a commission to cut back on EU regulations post Brexit by almost a quarter. This would save the UK between £33 billion ($43 billion) and £140 billion ($182 billion) annually and bring more industry and investment into the UK.	pro	EU regulations protect the health and safety of its citizens. Severely cutting them back would be a risky measure.	EU officials have stated they will not sign a trade deal with the UK if they begin a deregulatory "race to the bottom".	Deregulation doesn't automatically mean less stress on public finances or higher economic performance.
eu regulations protect the health and safety of its citizens. severely cutting them back would be a risky measure.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.3.1.	EU regulations protect the health and safety of its citizens. Severely cutting them back would be a risky measure.	con	
eu officials have stated they will not sign a trade deal with the uk if they begin a deregulatory "race to the bottom".	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.3.2.	EU officials have stated they will not sign a trade deal with the UK if they begin a deregulatory "race to the bottom".	con	
deregulation doesn't automatically mean less stress on public finances or higher economic performance.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.3.3.	Deregulation doesn't automatically mean less stress on public finances or higher economic performance.	con	Deregulation of drugs, tabacco and alcohol would lead to higher consumption of these substances and higher frequency of negative health related issues. Hence higher stress for NHS and public health budgets.	Unregulated capitalism leads to creation of monopolies, which in turn decreases competition.
deregulation of drugs, tabacco and alcohol would lead to higher consumption of these substances and higher frequency of negative health related issues. hence higher stress for nhs and public health budgets.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.3.3.1.	Deregulation of drugs, tabacco and alcohol would lead to higher consumption of these substances and higher frequency of negative health related issues. Hence higher stress for NHS and public health budgets.	con	
unregulated capitalism leads to creation of monopolies, which in turn decreases competition.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.3.3.2.	Unregulated capitalism leads to creation of monopolies, which in turn decreases competition.	con	
the uk is already a competitive market for companies under the status quo. trade barriers will only harm this.	1_1.7.1.3.1.8.4.	The UK is already a competitive market for companies under the status quo. Trade barriers will only harm this.	con	
the eu is responsible for the funding/loans behind many of the uk's largest infrastructure projects.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.	The EU is responsible for the funding/loans behind many of the UK's largest infrastructure projects.	con	The macroeconomic effects and uncertainty caused by Brexit are likely to slow down infrastructure spending.	The UK is one of the largest shareholders (16%) in the European Investment Bank (EIB), granting it considerable leverage to be able to direct the Bank's funding towards its own projects. By leaving the EU, and thereby leaving the Bank, the UK loses access to this pool of money.	The UK is seeking to maintain its membership of the European Investment Bank (EIB) after Brexit. If that happens, there will be a minimal effect, if any, on procurement for infrastructure spending.	With regards to funding, the UK is a net contributor to the EU. This means that following Brexit the UK could fund all the currently EU funded projects in the UK and still have money left over. With regards to loans, if the UK wishes to borrow money it can do so. It is not necessary to borrow exclusively from the EU. The UK does not do so now and would not need to in the future.
the macroeconomic effects and uncertainty caused by brexit are likely to slow down infrastructure spending.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.1.	The macroeconomic effects and uncertainty caused by Brexit are likely to slow down infrastructure spending.	con	Werner Hoyer, president of the European Investment Bank, said it was inevitable that lending to the UK would fall from recent levels of about £7bn a year once it left the EU.	The uncertainty around whether the new regulatory landscape of the UK will be in line with EU regulations is already causing delays in investment, putting jobs at risk.
werner hoyer, president of the european investment bank, said it was inevitable that lending to the uk would fall from recent levels of about £7bn a year once it left the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.1.1.	Werner Hoyer, president of the European Investment Bank, said it was inevitable that lending to the UK would fall from recent levels of about £7bn a year once it left the EU.	con	
the uncertainty around whether the new regulatory landscape of the uk will be in line with eu regulations is already causing delays in investment, putting jobs at risk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.1.2.	The uncertainty around whether the new regulatory landscape of the UK will be in line with EU regulations is already causing delays in investment, putting jobs at risk.	con	
the uk is one of the largest shareholders (16%) in the european investment bank (eib), granting it considerable leverage to be able to direct the bank's funding towards its own projects. by leaving the eu, and thereby leaving the bank, the uk loses access to this pool of money.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.2.	The UK is one of the largest shareholders (16%) in the European Investment Bank (EIB), granting it considerable leverage to be able to direct the Bank's funding towards its own projects. By leaving the EU, and thereby leaving the Bank, the UK loses access to this pool of money.	con	The UK has already experienced a significant reduction in funding from the EIB as a result of Brexit preparations.	The European Investment Bank loaned £1 billion towards the cost of Crossrail.
the uk has already experienced a significant reduction in funding from the eib as a result of brexit preparations.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.2.1.	The UK has already experienced a significant reduction in funding from the EIB as a result of Brexit preparations.	con	
the european investment bank loaned £1 billion towards the cost of crossrail.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.2.2.	The European Investment Bank loaned £1 billion towards the cost of Crossrail.	con	
the uk is seeking to maintain its membership of the european investment bank (eib) after brexit. if that happens, there will be a minimal effect, if any, on procurement for infrastructure spending.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.3.	The UK is seeking to maintain its membership of the European Investment Bank (EIB) after Brexit. If that happens, there will be a minimal effect, if any, on procurement for infrastructure spending.	pro	Maintaining access to the EIB would require a deal with EU, a prospect that would be costly to the UK and at the moment seems unlikely to even occur.	In order for the UK to remain a member of the EIB, all the constitution of the Bank would have to be amended and all remaining member states would have to agree to this change. This is by no means a given.
maintaining access to the eib would require a deal with eu, a prospect that would be costly to the uk and at the moment seems unlikely to even occur.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.3.1.	Maintaining access to the EIB would require a deal with EU, a prospect that would be costly to the UK and at the moment seems unlikely to even occur.	con	
in order for the uk to remain a member of the eib, all the constitution of the bank would have to be amended and all remaining member states would have to agree to this change. this is by no means a given.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.3.2.	In order for the UK to remain a member of the EIB, all the constitution of the Bank would have to be amended and all remaining member states would have to agree to this change. This is by no means a given.	con	
with regards to funding, the uk is a net contributor to the eu. this means that following brexit the uk could fund all the currently eu funded projects in the uk and still have money left over. with regards to loans, if the uk wishes to borrow money it can do so. it is not necessary to borrow exclusively from the eu. the uk does not do so now and would not need to in the future.	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.4.	With regards to funding, the UK is a net contributor to the EU. This means that following Brexit the UK could fund all the currently EU funded projects in the UK and still have money left over. With regards to loans, if the UK wishes to borrow money it can do so. It is not necessary to borrow exclusively from the EU. The UK does not do so now and would not need to in the future.	pro	The problem with this argument is that it does not take into account the efficiencies generated by doing some things at the EU level. It will probably cost the UK more to do them on their own.  youtube.com
the problem with this argument is that it does not take into account the efficiencies generated by doing some things at the eu level. it will probably cost the uk more to do them on their own.  youtube.com	1_1.7.1.3.1.9.4.1.	The problem with this argument is that it does not take into account the efficiencies generated by doing some things at the EU level. It will probably cost the UK more to do them on their own.  youtube.com	con	
a hard brexit would result in short-term regulatory chaos.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.	A hard Brexit would result in short-term regulatory chaos.	con	When we leave the EU, we will become a 'third country' in terms of data protection. This will cause business no end of effort and expense when transferring data to the EEA and beyond, unless there is an 'adequacy decision' issued. EU: the UK will be a 'third country' for personal data transfers from the point of Brexit	Currently, the UK's airline routes to EU and US destinations are arranged through EU agreements; a hard Brexit could call these into question.	Inadequate customs contingency planning could lead to gridlock in Kent and resulting in delayed deliveries to businesses in the UK.	Leaving Euratom, the EU's atomic energy community, could cause energy supplies to be disrupted due to the lack of equivalent national regulatory body, and the inability to source vital components from Europe.	Regulatory misalignment between the UK and EU could result in a prohibition on data sharing between the two zones, causing serious problems for businesses.	Insurance contracts, vital to companies' ability to manage risk, could face serious difficulty transferring between UK and EU jurisdictions.	A hard Brexit will result in a legal and regulatory no-man's land with nobody entirely confident of what laws and regulations still apply. Disputes will therefore take far longer to resolve, bringing up costs and throwing into disarray trade relations between businesses.	The UK is planning on staying within the remit of some of the regulatory agencies of the EU after Brexit, minimising the so-called regulatory upheaval.	Brexit is a golden opportunity to get rid of cumbersome EU regulations that the UK has no need for.	The UK will have to create national substitutes of the regulatory institutions that the UK benefits from as members of the EU. The UK will lose out on the economies of scale that the EU has and have costs in setting them up and running them.
when we leave the eu, we will become a 'third country' in terms of data protection. this will cause business no end of effort and expense when transferring data to the eea and beyond, unless there is an 'adequacy decision' issued. eu: the uk will be a 'third country' for personal data transfers from the point of brexit	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.1.	When we leave the EU, we will become a 'third country' in terms of data protection. This will cause business no end of effort and expense when transferring data to the EEA and beyond, unless there is an 'adequacy decision' issued. EU: the UK will be a 'third country' for personal data transfers from the point of Brexit	con	
inadequate customs contingency planning could lead to gridlock in kent and resulting in delayed deliveries to businesses in the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.3.	Inadequate customs contingency planning could lead to gridlock in Kent and resulting in delayed deliveries to businesses in the UK.	con	Sainsbury's, a major supermarket chain, is worried about food rotting at the border.
sainsbury's, a major supermarket chain, is worried about food rotting at the border.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.3.1.	Sainsbury's, a major supermarket chain, is worried about food rotting at the border.	con	
leaving euratom, the eu's atomic energy community, could cause energy supplies to be disrupted due to the lack of equivalent national regulatory body, and the inability to source vital components from europe.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.4.	Leaving Euratom, the EU's atomic energy community, could cause energy supplies to be disrupted due to the lack of equivalent national regulatory body, and the inability to source vital components from Europe.	con	
regulatory misalignment between the uk and eu could result in a prohibition on data sharing between the two zones, causing serious problems for businesses.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.5.	Regulatory misalignment between the UK and EU could result in a prohibition on data sharing between the two zones, causing serious problems for businesses.	con	
insurance contracts, vital to companies' ability to manage risk, could face serious difficulty transferring between uk and eu jurisdictions.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.6.	Insurance contracts, vital to companies' ability to manage risk, could face serious difficulty transferring between UK and EU jurisdictions.	con	
a hard brexit will result in a legal and regulatory no-man's land with nobody entirely confident of what laws and regulations still apply. disputes will therefore take far longer to resolve, bringing up costs and throwing into disarray trade relations between businesses.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.7.	A hard Brexit will result in a legal and regulatory no-man's land with nobody entirely confident of what laws and regulations still apply. Disputes will therefore take far longer to resolve, bringing up costs and throwing into disarray trade relations between businesses.	con	Many international contracts will lack the details to deal with a new customs border between the UK and the EU. Potentially reviewing thousands of contracts will take a lot of time, but re-negotiating them will take significantly longer, increasing costs and creating a large degree of uncertainty.
many international contracts will lack the details to deal with a new customs border between the uk and the eu. potentially reviewing thousands of contracts will take a lot of time, but re-negotiating them will take significantly longer, increasing costs and creating a large degree of uncertainty.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.7.1.	Many international contracts will lack the details to deal with a new customs border between the UK and the EU. Potentially reviewing thousands of contracts will take a lot of time, but re-negotiating them will take significantly longer, increasing costs and creating a large degree of uncertainty.	con	
the uk is planning on staying within the remit of some of the regulatory agencies of the eu after brexit, minimising the so-called regulatory upheaval.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.8.	The UK is planning on staying within the remit of some of the regulatory agencies of the EU after Brexit, minimising the so-called regulatory upheaval.	pro	Without a trade deal or open borders, staying in any regulatory remit will mean very little.
without a trade deal or open borders, staying in any regulatory remit will mean very little.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.8.1.	Without a trade deal or open borders, staying in any regulatory remit will mean very little.	con	
brexit is a golden opportunity to get rid of cumbersome eu regulations that the uk has no need for.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.9.	Brexit is a golden opportunity to get rid of cumbersome EU regulations that the UK has no need for.	pro	As the most regulation-happy member State of the EU, the UK is more likely to diverge from the EU as a nanny State.	It has been proposed that the UK could form a commission to cut back on EU regulations post Brexit by almost a quarter. This would save the UK between £33 billion ($43 billion) and £140 billion ($182 billion) annually and bring more industry and investment into the UK.	Supporters of deregulation won't identify or are not upfront about which regulations need to be scrapped and how they are currently cumbersome.	It is not certain that deregulation will save money. In fact, the government's own 2014 report into the functioning of the single market states "... integration has brought to \[...\] the UK, in most if not all observers’ opinions, appreciable economic benefits". \[...\] Is that trade-off, between cost and benefit, between economics and politics, of overall benefit to the UK? ... Most observers, and indeed most of the evidence received for this report, answer positively." (p.6).	There is no certainty that a more deregulated society is a direction that would win support from the general public, especially when it comes to environmental and labour regulations. A future government hoping to be elected on such a manifesto might not get elected, and therefore, such deregulation may never get implemented. In short, these economical advantages are highly hypothetical and speculative, not just on an economical level, but also on the political level.
as the most regulation-happy member state of the eu, the uk is more likely to diverge from the eu as a nanny state.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.9.1.	As the most regulation-happy member State of the EU, the UK is more likely to diverge from the EU as a nanny State.	con	
supporters of deregulation won't identify or are not upfront about which regulations need to be scrapped and how they are currently cumbersome.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.9.3.	Supporters of deregulation won't identify or are not upfront about which regulations need to be scrapped and how they are currently cumbersome.	con	
it is not certain that deregulation will save money. in fact, the government's own 2014 report into the functioning of the single market states "... integration has brought to \[...\] the uk, in most if not all observers’ opinions, appreciable economic benefits". \[...\] is that trade-off, between cost and benefit, between economics and politics, of overall benefit to the uk? ... most observers, and indeed most of the evidence received for this report, answer positively." (p.6).	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.9.4.	It is not certain that deregulation will save money. In fact, the government's own 2014 report into the functioning of the single market states "... integration has brought to \[...\] the UK, in most if not all observers’ opinions, appreciable economic benefits". \[...\] Is that trade-off, between cost and benefit, between economics and politics, of overall benefit to the UK? ... Most observers, and indeed most of the evidence received for this report, answer positively." (p.6).	con	
there is no certainty that a more deregulated society is a direction that would win support from the general public, especially when it comes to environmental and labour regulations. a future government hoping to be elected on such a manifesto might not get elected, and therefore, such deregulation may never get implemented. in short, these economical advantages are highly hypothetical and speculative, not just on an economical level, but also on the political level.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.9.5.	There is no certainty that a more deregulated society is a direction that would win support from the general public, especially when it comes to environmental and labour regulations. A future government hoping to be elected on such a manifesto might not get elected, and therefore, such deregulation may never get implemented. In short, these economical advantages are highly hypothetical and speculative, not just on an economical level, but also on the political level.	con	
the uk will have to create national substitutes of the regulatory institutions that the uk benefits from as members of the eu. the uk will lose out on the economies of scale that the eu has and have costs in setting them up and running them.	1_1.7.1.3.1.11.10.	The UK will have to create national substitutes of the regulatory institutions that the UK benefits from as members of the EU. The UK will lose out on the economies of scale that the EU has and have costs in setting them up and running them.	con	
the uk would save billions of pounds in annual eu contributions.	1_1.7.1.3.1.12.	The UK would save billions of pounds in annual EU contributions.	pro	The net gain from leaving has to be compared to the loss to the economy from leaving the free trade area. The impact of leaving the free trade zone is estimated to be greater than the savings in contributions to the EU  budget.	The UK pays more money into the EU budget than it gets back in EU spending in the UK. In 2016, the UK payed £13.1 billion and the EU in return spent £4.5 billion on the UK.
the net gain from leaving has to be compared to the loss to the economy from leaving the free trade area. the impact of leaving the free trade zone is estimated to be greater than the savings in contributions to the eu  budget.	1_1.7.1.3.1.12.1.	The net gain from leaving has to be compared to the loss to the economy from leaving the free trade area. The impact of leaving the free trade zone is estimated to be greater than the savings in contributions to the EU  budget.	con	
the uk pays more money into the eu budget than it gets back in eu spending in the uk. in 2016, the uk payed £13.1 billion and the eu in return spent £4.5 billion on the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.12.2.	The UK pays more money into the EU budget than it gets back in EU spending in the UK. In 2016, the UK payed £13.1 billion and the EU in return spent £4.5 billion on the UK.	pro	
many regions in the uk are economically unaffected by eu membership in the first place. therefore, a hard brexit is unlikely to economically damage sizeable parts of the uk economy.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.	Many regions in the UK are economically unaffected by EU membership in the first place. Therefore, a hard Brexit is unlikely to economically damage sizeable parts of the UK economy.	pro	Poorer regions where inequality was high and quality of life has declined usually voted for Brexit, despite the comparatively small impact of the EU in these regions.
poorer regions where inequality was high and quality of life has declined usually voted for brexit, despite the comparatively small impact of the eu in these regions.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.	Poorer regions where inequality was high and quality of life has declined usually voted for Brexit, despite the comparatively small impact of the EU in these regions.	pro	The EU directs considerable investment towards poorer regions of the UK that the national government tends to ignore.	The EU's guidelines leave the responsibility of dealing with regional inequality in countries down to national governments. It is therefore wrong to blame regional inequality on the EU.	London, the area that is most heavily intregated and reliant on European legislation, voted overwhelmingly to Remain.	Leave voters were disportionately clustered in areas where immigration ​was low.	Stronger than expected support for Leave in Sunderland has been accredited to rising unemployment, inequality and feeling of being ignored by the Westminster establishment.
the eu's guidelines leave the responsibility of dealing with regional inequality in countries down to national governments. it is therefore wrong to blame regional inequality on the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.2.	The EU's guidelines leave the responsibility of dealing with regional inequality in countries down to national governments. It is therefore wrong to blame regional inequality on the EU.	pro	The EU's Principle of Subsidiarity leaves decisions that are more efficiently taken at a national/regional level down to the respective nations or regions. (Article 5(3) of the Treaty on European Union
the eu's principle of subsidiarity leaves decisions that are more efficiently taken at a national/regional level down to the respective nations or regions. (article 5(3) of the treaty on european union	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.2.1.	The EU's Principle of Subsidiarity leaves decisions that are more efficiently taken at a national/regional level down to the respective nations or regions. (Article 5(3) of the Treaty on European Union	pro	In the UK, all 17 operations within the EU's Cohesion Policy (as part of EU regional management) are managed directly by the UK itself.
in the uk, all 17 operations within the eu's cohesion policy (as part of eu regional management) are managed directly by the uk itself.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.2.1.1.	In the UK, all 17 operations within the EU's Cohesion Policy (as part of EU regional management) are managed directly by the UK itself.	pro	
london, the area that is most heavily intregated and reliant on european legislation, voted overwhelmingly to remain.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.3.	London, the area that is most heavily intregated and reliant on European legislation, voted overwhelmingly to Remain.	pro	
leave voters were disportionately clustered in areas where immigration ​was low.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.4.	Leave voters were disportionately clustered in areas where immigration ​was low.	pro	
stronger than expected support for leave in sunderland has been accredited to rising unemployment, inequality and feeling of being ignored by the westminster establishment.	1_1.7.1.3.1.13.1.5.	Stronger than expected support for Leave in Sunderland has been accredited to rising unemployment, inequality and feeling of being ignored by the Westminster establishment.	pro	
the uk's trading relationship with the eu will become less profitable.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.	The UK's trading relationship with the EU will become less profitable.	con	With no new trade agreement with the EU, the rules of the World Trade Organisation would apply. Tariffs would be imposed on goods that the UK sends to the EU, which would negatively affect many British companies who rely on this trade.	Businesses could lose their passporting rights, which allow them to sell their services across the EU without having to obtain licences in each individual country.	Britain will default to trading under the worst possible terms with the EU in the immediate aftermath of Brexit.	UK companies that participate in security-sensitive EU industry collaborations would suffer.
businesses could lose their passporting rights, which allow them to sell their services across the eu without having to obtain licences in each individual country.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.	Businesses could lose their passporting rights, which allow them to sell their services across the EU without having to obtain licences in each individual country.	con	Over 5,400 British firms rely on passporting rights to bring in £9 billion in revenue every year to Britain.	Loss of passporting rights would mean the immediate end to any business UK banks had in the EU.	Services includes much of the UK's computing industry, such as apps sold online.
over 5,400 british firms rely on passporting rights to bring in £9 billion in revenue every year to britain.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.1.	Over 5,400 British firms rely on passporting rights to bring in £9 billion in revenue every year to Britain.	con	
loss of passporting rights would mean the immediate end to any business uk banks had in the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.2.	Loss of passporting rights would mean the immediate end to any business UK banks had in the EU.	con	As a result, since the Brexit vote, many banks and financial firms have begun establishing EU bases to take their operations out of the UK.	Losing passporting rights only involves a restructuring of operations in order to continue offering financial services in Europe.	Zurich, Switzerland, is the second most competitive banking centre in Europe after London despite not having passporting rights.
as a result, since the brexit vote, many banks and financial firms have begun establishing eu bases to take their operations out of the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.2.1.	As a result, since the Brexit vote, many banks and financial firms have begun establishing EU bases to take their operations out of the UK.	con	
losing passporting rights only involves a restructuring of operations in order to continue offering financial services in europe.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.2.2.	Losing passporting rights only involves a restructuring of operations in order to continue offering financial services in Europe.	pro	
zurich, switzerland, is the second most competitive banking centre in europe after london despite not having passporting rights.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.2.3.	Zurich, Switzerland, is the second most competitive banking centre in Europe after London despite not having passporting rights.	pro	Switzerland benefits from a more open freedom of movement agreement with the EU than the UK will have after Brexit.	Switzerland has made many ethical trade offs to ensure their competitive edge in the banking sector.
switzerland benefits from a more open freedom of movement agreement with the eu than the uk will have after brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.2.3.1.	Switzerland benefits from a more open freedom of movement agreement with the EU than the UK will have after Brexit.	con	
switzerland has made many ethical trade offs to ensure their competitive edge in the banking sector.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.2.3.2.	Switzerland has made many ethical trade offs to ensure their competitive edge in the banking sector.	con	
services includes much of the uk's computing industry, such as apps sold online.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.2.3.	Services includes much of the UK's computing industry, such as apps sold online.	con	
britain will default to trading under the worst possible terms with the eu in the immediate aftermath of brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.3.	Britain will default to trading under the worst possible terms with the EU in the immediate aftermath of Brexit.	con	Britain could become a 'third country', meaning trading with the world under the worst possible tariff rules. Even after a period spent establishing its position under WTO rules, the UK will almost certainly still suffer.
britain could become a 'third country', meaning trading with the world under the worst possible tariff rules. even after a period spent establishing its position under wto rules, the uk will almost certainly still suffer.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.3.1.	Britain could become a 'third country', meaning trading with the world under the worst possible tariff rules. Even after a period spent establishing its position under WTO rules, the UK will almost certainly still suffer.	con	
uk companies that participate in security-sensitive eu industry collaborations would suffer.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.4.	UK companies that participate in security-sensitive EU industry collaborations would suffer.	con	Britan's satellite industry might very well lose out on the Galileo project.	Airbus has already announced that it will move part of it's satellite making operations from Britain to France.
britan's satellite industry might very well lose out on the galileo project.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.4.1.	Britan's satellite industry might very well lose out on the Galileo project.	con	
airbus has already announced that it will move part of it's satellite making operations from britain to france.	1_1.7.1.3.1.14.4.2.	Airbus has already announced that it will move part of it's satellite making operations from Britain to France.	con	
economic forecasts are inherently unreliable due to the infinite range of variables involved. given that, it is impossible to accurately predict the economic consequences of brexit, or whether the uk economy would be better off in or out of the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.15.	Economic forecasts are inherently unreliable due to the infinite range of variables involved. Given that, it is impossible to accurately predict the economic consequences of Brexit, or whether the UK economy would be better off in or out of the EU.	pro	The Bank of England and David Cameron made very pessimistic predictions during the referendum about the impact of a leave vote and then later admitted these were overstated.	The weather is also governed by a near infinite range of variables and while forecasts are often wrong, they provide a more accurate picture than random guesses.	Economic forecasts are not predictions. They are a tool that supports evidence based policy making, such as the decision of the Bank of England after the referendum vote to cut interest rates and boost quantitive easing, to ward off the worst effects of the fall of the pound.
the bank of england and david cameron made very pessimistic predictions during the referendum about the impact of a leave vote and then later admitted these were overstated.	1_1.7.1.3.1.15.1.	The Bank of England and David Cameron made very pessimistic predictions during the referendum about the impact of a leave vote and then later admitted these were overstated.	pro	
the weather is also governed by a near infinite range of variables and while forecasts are often wrong, they provide a more accurate picture than random guesses.	1_1.7.1.3.1.15.2.	The weather is also governed by a near infinite range of variables and while forecasts are often wrong, they provide a more accurate picture than random guesses.	con	
economic forecasts are not predictions. they are a tool that supports evidence based policy making, such as the decision of the bank of england after the referendum vote to cut interest rates and boost quantitive easing, to ward off the worst effects of the fall of the pound.	1_1.7.1.3.1.15.3.	Economic forecasts are not predictions. They are a tool that supports evidence based policy making, such as the decision of the Bank of England after the referendum vote to cut interest rates and boost quantitive easing, to ward off the worst effects of the fall of the pound.	con	
the uk is too focused on ties to europe. diversified international trade deals are more lucrative.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.	The UK is too focused on ties to Europe. Diversified international trade deals are more lucrative.	pro	Whilst the EU is a primary trading block, compared to other major EU economies the UK is more tilted to trade outside the EU, giving it more resilience and more opportunities within other trade for good pacts.	Trade in non-physical goods rose (80%) from 2006-2016. Whereas physical goods had a 40% increase. So physical proximity will be increasingly less important to overall trade. It's as easy to do financial services for someone on the other side of the planet as it is with a person in the country next to you.	The 'anglosphere' of countries with English as a primary business language puts the UK at an advantage in new global trade deals with US/Canada/Australia/India/Nigeria.	Even if the US and Britain are able to come to an agreement quickly, Britain is unable, per EU rules, to sign new deals until the Brexit process is completed.	Before the referendum Britain relied on experienced EU negotiators to secure lucrative trade deals. Many of Britain's new trade officials are novices, and thus at a disadvantage negotiating new agreements.	On balance, the EU is a barrier to global free trade. A hard Brexit will remove this barrier, allowing the UK to pursue profitable free trade agreements with other countries.	If we carve up the world in terms wealth, most of the 35 most wealthy are in Europe. The rest are really far away e.g. US. Canada, Australia, China, India and Japan.	One of the main reasons to trade with Europe (rather than other countries) is distance. Distance equates to fuel and time. Increase either and cost increases, while fuel also increases our carbon footprint.	Commonwealth trade officials are currently pursuing plans for closer economic integration with the UK in the wake of Brexit.	The EU is not the place where most economic growth is occurring. The EU’s share of world GDP is forecast to decline to 22% in 2025, down from 37% in 1973.	While within the EU, the UK can not negotiate its own trade deals without consensus of all the member states. This makes it far harder to strike deals with important emerging economies like China and India for example.	The UK could pursue membership in NAFTA.	Without the negotiating leverage of the combined EU trade block, the UK will be unlikely to secure new trade deals on as favorable terms as it would have as a member of the EU.	The EU remains Britain's largest trade partner, accounting for 48% of goods exports from the UK in 2017, justifying Britain's focus on the EU.
whilst the eu is a primary trading block, compared to other major eu economies the uk is more tilted to trade outside the eu, giving it more resilience and more opportunities within other trade for good pacts.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.1.	Whilst the EU is a primary trading block, compared to other major EU economies the UK is more tilted to trade outside the EU, giving it more resilience and more opportunities within other trade for good pacts.	pro	
trade in non-physical goods rose (80%) from 2006-2016. whereas physical goods had a 40% increase. so physical proximity will be increasingly less important to overall trade. it's as easy to do financial services for someone on the other side of the planet as it is with a person in the country next to you.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.2.	Trade in non-physical goods rose (80%) from 2006-2016. Whereas physical goods had a 40% increase. So physical proximity will be increasingly less important to overall trade. It's as easy to do financial services for someone on the other side of the planet as it is with a person in the country next to you.	pro	Trade in many non-physical goods oftens relies on trade agreements and single market agreements, which is why the EU is the UK's largest service trading partner. A Hard Brexit would cripple EU-UK service trade.
trade in many non-physical goods oftens relies on trade agreements and single market agreements, which is why the eu is the uk's largest service trading partner. a hard brexit would cripple eu-uk service trade.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.2.1.	Trade in many non-physical goods oftens relies on trade agreements and single market agreements, which is why the EU is the UK's largest service trading partner. A Hard Brexit would cripple EU-UK service trade.	con	
the 'anglosphere' of countries with english as a primary business language puts the uk at an advantage in new global trade deals with us/canada/australia/india/nigeria.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.3.	The 'anglosphere' of countries with English as a primary business language puts the UK at an advantage in new global trade deals with US/Canada/Australia/India/Nigeria.	pro	Countries within the EU teach English as a second language as it is considered the number one language for business in the world.
countries within the eu teach english as a second language as it is considered the number one language for business in the world.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.3.1.	Countries within the EU teach English as a second language as it is considered the number one language for business in the world.	con	
even if the us and britain are able to come to an agreement quickly, britain is unable, per eu rules, to sign new deals until the brexit process is completed.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.4.	Even if the US and Britain are able to come to an agreement quickly, Britain is unable, per EU rules, to sign new deals until the Brexit process is completed.	con	Although Britain cannot officially sign independent trade deals while still a member of the EU, Britain has informal arrangements with 36 countries to implement free trade agreements once Britain officially exits.	The EU27 may extend the transition period and require Britain to refrain from implementing any independent trade deals for two years after Brexit.	It is unlikely any trade deal with another country will be signed immediately. Negotiations for any trade deal will take time, so the UK should start now rather than starting the process after it leaves the EU.
although britain cannot officially sign independent trade deals while still a member of the eu, britain has informal arrangements with 36 countries to implement free trade agreements once britain officially exits.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.4.1.	Although Britain cannot officially sign independent trade deals while still a member of the EU, Britain has informal arrangements with 36 countries to implement free trade agreements once Britain officially exits.	pro	
it is unlikely any trade deal with another country will be signed immediately. negotiations for any trade deal will take time, so the uk should start now rather than starting the process after it leaves the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.4.3.	It is unlikely any trade deal with another country will be signed immediately. Negotiations for any trade deal will take time, so the UK should start now rather than starting the process after it leaves the EU.	pro	
before the referendum britain relied on experienced eu negotiators to secure lucrative trade deals. many of britain's new trade officials are novices, and thus at a disadvantage negotiating new agreements.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.5.	Before the referendum Britain relied on experienced EU negotiators to secure lucrative trade deals. Many of Britain's new trade officials are novices, and thus at a disadvantage negotiating new agreements.	con	The Department for International Trade has hired high-calibre trade negotiators to fill the experience gap.	Not only is the British negotiating team not sufficiently qualified, they are also understaffed: Whitehall's Trade Policy Group employ's 300 people, but the UK Trade Policy Observatory, an independent think-tank, says they need at least 700 people.
the department for international trade has hired high-calibre trade negotiators to fill the experience gap.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.5.1.	The Department for International Trade has hired high-calibre trade negotiators to fill the experience gap.	pro	
not only is the british negotiating team not sufficiently qualified, they are also understaffed: whitehall's trade policy group employ's 300 people, but the uk trade policy observatory, an independent think-tank, says they need at least 700 people.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.5.2.	Not only is the British negotiating team not sufficiently qualified, they are also understaffed: Whitehall's Trade Policy Group employ's 300 people, but the UK Trade Policy Observatory, an independent think-tank, says they need at least 700 people.	con	
on balance, the eu is a barrier to global free trade. a hard brexit will remove this barrier, allowing the uk to pursue profitable free trade agreements with other countries.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.	On balance, the EU is a barrier to global free trade. A hard Brexit will remove this barrier, allowing the UK to pursue profitable free trade agreements with other countries.	pro	The EU prevents member states from striking their own free trade deals with third countries, so a deal opening borders with India is only possible if the UK leaves.	The European Union is one of the most open economies in the world and is committed to free trade.
the eu prevents member states from striking their own free trade deals with third countries, so a deal opening borders with india is only possible if the uk leaves.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.	The EU prevents member states from striking their own free trade deals with third countries, so a deal opening borders with India is only possible if the UK leaves.	pro	While within the EU, the UK can not negotiate its own trade deals without consensus of all the member states. This makes it far harder to strike deals with important emerging economies like China and India for example.
while within the eu, the uk can not negotiate its own trade deals without consensus of all the member states. this makes it far harder to strike deals with important emerging economies like china and india for example.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.	While within the EU, the UK can not negotiate its own trade deals without consensus of all the member states. This makes it far harder to strike deals with important emerging economies like China and India for example.	pro	The ability to do our own trade deals will only bring in an extra 0.6% GDP. Far less than the losses from Brexit, especially Hard Brexit.	Trade deals tend to involve the liberalisation of immigration controls. Trade deals with India would almost certainly increase immigration from those countries, to the displeasure of many Brexit voters.	The EU is also looking at partnerships with India.	Without the negotiating leverage of the combined EU trade block, the UK will be unlikely to secure new trade deals on as favorable terms as it would have as a member of the EU.
the ability to do our own trade deals will only bring in an extra 0.6% gdp. far less than the losses from brexit, especially hard brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.1.	The ability to do our own trade deals will only bring in an extra 0.6% GDP. Far less than the losses from Brexit, especially Hard Brexit.	con	
trade deals tend to involve the liberalisation of immigration controls. trade deals with india would almost certainly increase immigration from those countries, to the displeasure of many brexit voters.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.2.	Trade deals tend to involve the liberalisation of immigration controls. Trade deals with India would almost certainly increase immigration from those countries, to the displeasure of many Brexit voters.	con	India has stated that it cannot separate free movement of people from the free flow of goods, services and investments, indicating that any free trade deal will likely require increased immigration from India.	There are many different levels of trade deal. The strongest / most expansive Trade deals (those with the most advanced stage of economic integration include eliminating labour barriers (Common markets, Economic Unions, Economic and Monetary Unions, and Complete economic integrations.	A very common type of trade deal is a Free Trade Area, which typically does not include "eliminating barriers for exchange of labour".
there are many different levels of trade deal. the strongest / most expansive trade deals (those with the most advanced stage of economic integration include eliminating labour barriers (common markets, economic unions, economic and monetary unions, and complete economic integrations.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.2.2.	There are many different levels of trade deal. The strongest / most expansive Trade deals (those with the most advanced stage of economic integration include eliminating labour barriers (Common markets, Economic Unions, Economic and Monetary Unions, and Complete economic integrations.	con	
a very common type of trade deal is a free trade area, which typically does not include "eliminating barriers for exchange of labour".	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.2.3.	A very common type of trade deal is a Free Trade Area, which typically does not include "eliminating barriers for exchange of labour".	pro	
the eu is also looking at partnerships with india.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.	The EU is also looking at partnerships with India.	con	Yet such a trade deal is possible exactly because the UK is about to leave the EU. The two demands made by India - visa liberalisation and high tariffs on foreign wines and spirits - were heavily resisted by the UK during negotiations in 2013.	The EU has been working on a free trade agreement with India since 2007, which has not been successful after 7 rounds of negotiations. The UK is a weaker economic force - if the EU can't do it, the UK alone can't either.	The EU and India recently adopted three joint declarations relating to counterterrorism, climate change, and sustainable development at the 14th EU-India summit.
yet such a trade deal is possible exactly because the uk is about to leave the eu. the two demands made by india - visa liberalisation and high tariffs on foreign wines and spirits - were heavily resisted by the uk during negotiations in 2013.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.1.	Yet such a trade deal is possible exactly because the UK is about to leave the EU. The two demands made by India - visa liberalisation and high tariffs on foreign wines and spirits - were heavily resisted by the UK during negotiations in 2013.	pro	
the eu has been working on a free trade agreement with india since 2007, which has not been successful after 7 rounds of negotiations. the uk is a weaker economic force - if the eu can't do it, the uk alone can't either.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.	The EU has been working on a free trade agreement with India since 2007, which has not been successful after 7 rounds of negotiations. The UK is a weaker economic force - if the EU can't do it, the UK alone can't either.	con	Without the negotiating leverage of the combined EU trade block, the UK will be unlikely to secure new trade deals on as favorable terms as it would have as a member of the EU.
without the negotiating leverage of the combined eu trade block, the uk will be unlikely to secure new trade deals on as favorable terms as it would have as a member of the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.	Without the negotiating leverage of the combined EU trade block, the UK will be unlikely to secure new trade deals on as favorable terms as it would have as a member of the EU.	con	The UK wants free trade, as evidenced by the fact that it was a key plank of the winning Leave campaign. All the protectionist conditions that the EU places on its trading partners are inherently unfavourable in the context of free trade.	A number of countries which have trade deals with the EU wish to renegotiate terms of any post-Brexit deal with the UK to be more in their favour, and thus worse for the UK.	As the UK economy is already relatively global and deregulated, Britain has limited leverage when it comes to negotiating free trade deals.
the uk wants free trade, as evidenced by the fact that it was a key plank of the winning leave campaign. all the protectionist conditions that the eu places on its trading partners are inherently unfavourable in the context of free trade.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.1.	The UK wants free trade, as evidenced by the fact that it was a key plank of the winning Leave campaign. All the protectionist conditions that the EU places on its trading partners are inherently unfavourable in the context of free trade.	pro	The European Union is one of the most open economies in the world and is committed to free trade.
a number of countries which have trade deals with the eu wish to renegotiate terms of any post-brexit deal with the uk to be more in their favour, and thus worse for the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.2.	A number of countries which have trade deals with the EU wish to renegotiate terms of any post-Brexit deal with the UK to be more in their favour, and thus worse for the UK.	con	Trade is not a zero sum game. Something that is in favour of a trading partner is not necessarily worse for the UK.
trade is not a zero sum game. something that is in favour of a trading partner is not necessarily worse for the uk.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.2.1.	Trade is not a zero sum game. Something that is in favour of a trading partner is not necessarily worse for the UK.	pro	The EU charges a 16% tariff on oranges from south Africa to protect Big Spanish Orange. Oranges would be cheaper if we left the EU and abolished this tariff, and we'd buy more south African oranges.  This is in the interests of both the UK and our trading partner south Africa.
the eu charges a 16% tariff on oranges from south africa to protect big spanish orange. oranges would be cheaper if we left the eu and abolished this tariff, and we'd buy more south african oranges.  this is in the interests of both the uk and our trading partner south africa.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.2.1.1.	The EU charges a 16% tariff on oranges from south Africa to protect Big Spanish Orange. Oranges would be cheaper if we left the EU and abolished this tariff, and we'd buy more south African oranges.  This is in the interests of both the UK and our trading partner south Africa.	pro	
as the uk economy is already relatively global and deregulated, britain has limited leverage when it comes to negotiating free trade deals.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.3.	As the UK economy is already relatively global and deregulated, Britain has limited leverage when it comes to negotiating free trade deals.	con	The  narrative portrayed in the cited support article of Britain wanting to "dictate terms" and "have leverage" in trade negotiations is inherently false. Britain wants to pursue a free trade agenda. Protectionist attempts to dictate terms and use leverage are things that protectionist blocs like the EU do. Brexit is an opportunity to trade with the world unfettered by such chains.
the  narrative portrayed in the cited support article of britain wanting to "dictate terms" and "have leverage" in trade negotiations is inherently false. britain wants to pursue a free trade agenda. protectionist attempts to dictate terms and use leverage are things that protectionist blocs like the eu do. brexit is an opportunity to trade with the world unfettered by such chains.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.3.1.	The  narrative portrayed in the cited support article of Britain wanting to "dictate terms" and "have leverage" in trade negotiations is inherently false. Britain wants to pursue a free trade agenda. Protectionist attempts to dictate terms and use leverage are things that protectionist blocs like the EU do. Brexit is an opportunity to trade with the world unfettered by such chains.	pro	The UK wants free trade, as evidenced by the fact that it was a key plank of the winning Leave campaign. All the protectionist conditions that the EU places on its trading partners are inherently unfavourable in the context of free trade.	Wanting unfettered access to all world markets is all well and good, getting such access is entirely another thing, and not very likely.
wanting unfettered access to all world markets is all well and good, getting such access is entirely another thing, and not very likely.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.2.1.3.1.2.	Wanting unfettered access to all world markets is all well and good, getting such access is entirely another thing, and not very likely.	con	
the eu and india recently adopted three joint declarations relating to counterterrorism, climate change, and sustainable development at the 14th eu-india summit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.6.1.1.3.3.	The EU and India recently adopted three joint declarations relating to counterterrorism, climate change, and sustainable development at the 14th EU-India summit.	con	
if we carve up the world in terms wealth, most of the 35 most wealthy are in europe. the rest are really far away e.g. us. canada, australia, china, india and japan.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.7.	If we carve up the world in terms wealth, most of the 35 most wealthy are in Europe. The rest are really far away e.g. US. Canada, Australia, China, India and Japan.	con	
one of the main reasons to trade with europe (rather than other countries) is distance. distance equates to fuel and time. increase either and cost increases, while fuel also increases our carbon footprint.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.8.	One of the main reasons to trade with Europe (rather than other countries) is distance. Distance equates to fuel and time. Increase either and cost increases, while fuel also increases our carbon footprint.	con	
commonwealth trade officials are currently pursuing plans for closer economic integration with the uk in the wake of brexit.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.9.	Commonwealth trade officials are currently pursuing plans for closer economic integration with the UK in the wake of Brexit.	pro	Good trade agreements are based on trust and goodwill. Theresa May has already damaged that through her "Hostile Environment" policies which led to the Windrush Scandal. "It is a matter of denial of the dignity of citizenship, which really cannot be restored," - Jamaican Prime Minister Andrew Holness. uk.reuters.com
good trade agreements are based on trust and goodwill. theresa may has already damaged that through her "hostile environment" policies which led to the windrush scandal. "it is a matter of denial of the dignity of citizenship, which really cannot be restored," - jamaican prime minister andrew holness. uk.reuters.com	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.9.1.	Good trade agreements are based on trust and goodwill. Theresa May has already damaged that through her "Hostile Environment" policies which led to the Windrush Scandal. "It is a matter of denial of the dignity of citizenship, which really cannot be restored," - Jamaican Prime Minister Andrew Holness. uk.reuters.com	con	
the eu is not the place where most economic growth is occurring. the eu’s share of world gdp is forecast to decline to 22% in 2025, down from 37% in 1973.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.10.	The EU is not the place where most economic growth is occurring. The EU’s share of world GDP is forecast to decline to 22% in 2025, down from 37% in 1973.	pro	This argument confuses growth with total volume in economic activity. Many areas of high relative growth still represent small markets. Even with slower growth relative to the rest of the world, the EU will remain the UK's largest export market.	This argument neglects the barriers to trade imposed by geography. Even with falling transport costs, these act to increase the cost of UK goods in more distant markets such as China, Japan, and North and South America.	This claim misleadingly suggests that EU trade is shrinking, by confusing GDP and growth with share of total world trade.  The EU has a smaller total share of world trade, because countries like China, India and South Korea have grown very quickly and now take much larger shares of total world trade than they used to. As more middle income countries grow, everyone is sharing a much bigger pie, meaning smaller percentages don't automatically mean less pie.
this argument confuses growth with total volume in economic activity. many areas of high relative growth still represent small markets. even with slower growth relative to the rest of the world, the eu will remain the uk's largest export market.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.10.1.	This argument confuses growth with total volume in economic activity. Many areas of high relative growth still represent small markets. Even with slower growth relative to the rest of the world, the EU will remain the UK's largest export market.	con	
this argument neglects the barriers to trade imposed by geography. even with falling transport costs, these act to increase the cost of uk goods in more distant markets such as china, japan, and north and south america.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.10.2.	This argument neglects the barriers to trade imposed by geography. Even with falling transport costs, these act to increase the cost of UK goods in more distant markets such as China, Japan, and North and South America.	con	
this claim misleadingly suggests that eu trade is shrinking, by confusing gdp and growth with share of total world trade.  the eu has a smaller total share of world trade, because countries like china, india and south korea have grown very quickly and now take much larger shares of total world trade than they used to. as more middle income countries grow, everyone is sharing a much bigger pie, meaning smaller percentages don't automatically mean less pie.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.10.3.	This claim misleadingly suggests that EU trade is shrinking, by confusing GDP and growth with share of total world trade.  The EU has a smaller total share of world trade, because countries like China, India and South Korea have grown very quickly and now take much larger shares of total world trade than they used to. As more middle income countries grow, everyone is sharing a much bigger pie, meaning smaller percentages don't automatically mean less pie.	con	
the uk could pursue membership in nafta.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.	The UK could pursue membership in NAFTA.	pro	Joining NAFTA would require the UK to conform to the regulatory framework of the deal for goods and services, a framework that is significantly different to the one that the UK currently has as a member of the EU. The highly complex legislative changes would make trade difficult with the EU, and would undermine stability in British markets.	Joining NAFTA would expose a range of UK manufacturing and agriculture sectors to highly competitive US and Mexican exports, undermining domestic industry.	The Trump administration is currently renegotiating NAFTA. This means that not only will the UK have to wait for those negotiations to complete, it currently cannot know if the deal will actually be advantageous for it to join.	Joining NAFTA will increase trade with the US, Mexico, and Canada, whose combined GDP reached GPB 17.2 trillion in 2017. This outweighs the EU, at GPB 15.7 trillion.	The effect of distance on trade is a well studied issue in economics. Whilst we could boost trade with other countries they will be further away, increasing the costs, so it is unlikely we will ever find ourselves trading as much with NAFTA or other distant trade organisations, as we will with countries in Europe. If we do it will be more expensive, and more environmentally damaging than if we could trade with the EU.
joining nafta would require the uk to conform to the regulatory framework of the deal for goods and services, a framework that is significantly different to the one that the uk currently has as a member of the eu. the highly complex legislative changes would make trade difficult with the eu, and would undermine stability in british markets.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.1.	Joining NAFTA would require the UK to conform to the regulatory framework of the deal for goods and services, a framework that is significantly different to the one that the UK currently has as a member of the EU. The highly complex legislative changes would make trade difficult with the EU, and would undermine stability in British markets.	con	To benefit from preferential market access into NAFTA, UK exporters would, in certain cases, have to significantly restructure their production, supply and distribution chains to comply with the North American trading zone’s product standards and rules of origin. Industries such as the automotive one would have to produce two versions of the same product to export to both EU and NAFTA markets.
to benefit from preferential market access into nafta, uk exporters would, in certain cases, have to significantly restructure their production, supply and distribution chains to comply with the north american trading zone’s product standards and rules of origin. industries such as the automotive one would have to produce two versions of the same product to export to both eu and nafta markets.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.1.1.	To benefit from preferential market access into NAFTA, UK exporters would, in certain cases, have to significantly restructure their production, supply and distribution chains to comply with the North American trading zone’s product standards and rules of origin. Industries such as the automotive one would have to produce two versions of the same product to export to both EU and NAFTA markets.	con	
joining nafta would expose a range of uk manufacturing and agriculture sectors to highly competitive us and mexican exports, undermining domestic industry.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.2.	Joining NAFTA would expose a range of UK manufacturing and agriculture sectors to highly competitive US and Mexican exports, undermining domestic industry.	con	
the trump administration is currently renegotiating nafta. this means that not only will the uk have to wait for those negotiations to complete, it currently cannot know if the deal will actually be advantageous for it to join.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.3.	The Trump administration is currently renegotiating NAFTA. This means that not only will the UK have to wait for those negotiations to complete, it currently cannot know if the deal will actually be advantageous for it to join.	con	
joining nafta will increase trade with the us, mexico, and canada, whose combined gdp reached gpb 17.2 trillion in 2017. this outweighs the eu, at gpb 15.7 trillion.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.4.	Joining NAFTA will increase trade with the US, Mexico, and Canada, whose combined GDP reached GPB 17.2 trillion in 2017. This outweighs the EU, at GPB 15.7 trillion.	pro	
the effect of distance on trade is a well studied issue in economics. whilst we could boost trade with other countries they will be further away, increasing the costs, so it is unlikely we will ever find ourselves trading as much with nafta or other distant trade organisations, as we will with countries in europe. if we do it will be more expensive, and more environmentally damaging than if we could trade with the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.12.5.	The effect of distance on trade is a well studied issue in economics. Whilst we could boost trade with other countries they will be further away, increasing the costs, so it is unlikely we will ever find ourselves trading as much with NAFTA or other distant trade organisations, as we will with countries in Europe. If we do it will be more expensive, and more environmentally damaging than if we could trade with the EU.	con	
the eu remains britain's largest trade partner, accounting for 48% of goods exports from the uk in 2017, justifying britain's focus on the eu.	1_1.7.1.3.1.16.14.	The EU remains Britain's largest trade partner, accounting for 48% of goods exports from the UK in 2017, justifying Britain's focus on the EU.	con	
damage to the uk economy was advised by both side during the campaign, with different degree of the damage, majority decided that other benefits will overbalance short economy disadvantages.	1_1.7.1.3.1.17.	Damage to the UK economy was advised by both side during the campaign, with different degree of the damage, majority decided that other benefits will overbalance short economy disadvantages.	pro	Warnings of economic damage were almost always dismissed as 'Project Fear' by Leave politicians. Many people weren't aware of any short term damage to the economy and some Leavers now predict up to 30 years of 'short term' economic pain. Link
warnings of economic damage were almost always dismissed as 'project fear' by leave politicians. many people weren't aware of any short term damage to the economy and some leavers now predict up to 30 years of 'short term' economic pain. link	1_1.7.1.3.1.17.1.	Warnings of economic damage were almost always dismissed as 'Project Fear' by Leave politicians. Many people weren't aware of any short term damage to the economy and some Leavers now predict up to 30 years of 'short term' economic pain. Link	con	
theresa may has refused to rule out when asked in parliament if the nhs would be part of any trade deal discussions with america.	1_1.7.2.	Theresa May has refused to rule out when asked in Parliament if the NHS would be part of any trade deal discussions with America.	con	US law allows American authorities to access data held overseas in order to tackle crime and terrorism, potentially including British patients if they are given greater access to the NHS.	This raises risks of higher costs of drugs for British patients as the US has pushed for higher drug prices in Brexit trade negotiations as part of their ''put American patients first'' scheme.
us law allows american authorities to access data held overseas in order to tackle crime and terrorism, potentially including british patients if they are given greater access to the nhs.	1_1.7.2.1.	US law allows American authorities to access data held overseas in order to tackle crime and terrorism, potentially including British patients if they are given greater access to the NHS.	con	
this raises risks of higher costs of drugs for british patients as the us has pushed for higher drug prices in brexit trade negotiations as part of their ''put american patients first'' scheme.	1_1.7.2.2.	This raises risks of higher costs of drugs for British patients as the US has pushed for higher drug prices in Brexit trade negotiations as part of their ''put American patients first'' scheme.	con	
if the uk will regain control over immigration, the demand side of the equation in the health service can be stopped in its increase. migration is linked to 82% of population growth between 2001 and 2016 - immigrants and their children. 1991 to 2017 estimated net not-british immigration into the uk at 6,076,000.	1_1.7.3.	If the UK will regain control over immigration, the demand side of the equation in the health service can be stopped in its increase. Migration is linked to 82% of population growth between 2001 and 2016 - immigrants and their children. 1991 to 2017 estimated net not-British immigration into the UK at 6,076,000.	pro	The UK can sufficiently control immigration while remaining in the EU.	The UK has full control over the flow of non-EU migrants, which accounts for over 80% of the UK's recent immigrant intake. A failure to control controllable immigration gives a strong indication that EU immigration would not be significantly reduced by Brexit.	A tiny fraction of the UK's immigrants from the EU were from the over 65 or under 15 age ranges, the groups that create most of the demand for healthcare. Increased demand for healthcare has been driven almost exclusively by the ageing of the native UK population.	The proportion of dependents was much higher in other non-EU groups. If this was a serious concern, then it would be far more effective for the UK to simply limit movement from these regions.
a tiny fraction of the uk's immigrants from the eu were from the over 65 or under 15 age ranges, the groups that create most of the demand for healthcare. increased demand for healthcare has been driven almost exclusively by the ageing of the native uk population.	1_1.7.3.3.	A tiny fraction of the UK's immigrants from the EU were from the over 65 or under 15 age ranges, the groups that create most of the demand for healthcare. Increased demand for healthcare has been driven almost exclusively by the ageing of the native UK population.	con	
the proportion of dependents was much higher in other non-eu groups. if this was a serious concern, then it would be far more effective for the uk to simply limit movement from these regions.	1_1.7.3.4.	The proportion of dependents was much higher in other non-EU groups. If this was a serious concern, then it would be far more effective for the UK to simply limit movement from these regions.	con	
a clean brexit would enable the uk to move away from applying competition law to the nhs, something which is currently more difficult due to eu regulations (pg. 4.	1_1.7.4.	A clean Brexit would enable the UK to move away from applying competition law to the NHS, something which is currently more difficult due to EU regulations (pg. 4.	pro	While the UK itself has competition law that applies to the NHS this cannot be reformed as it is echoed by European regulations. This could be changed after Brexit.	Competition law has prevented the NHS from enacting mergers that could improve care and reduce costs.	Competition law has allowed private health providers to challenge the NHS for failure to refer services, creating expensive legal fees. This risks clinicians within the NHS experiencing a "chilling effect" whereby they are discouraged from referring patients to public providers, over private ones, even when it is the best clinical decision.	EU competition law only applies to 'undertakings'. When acting in a way connected with 'the exercise of the powers of a public authority', or providing services based on solidarity, an entity is not an undertaking. The NHS therefore does not have to qualify as an 'undertaking' for the purpose of EU competition law. (Case CJEU: Wouters v Algemene Raad van de Nederlandsche Orde van Advocaten, , 2002, paragraph 57
while the uk itself has competition law that applies to the nhs this cannot be reformed as it is echoed by european regulations. this could be changed after brexit.	1_1.7.4.1.	While the UK itself has competition law that applies to the NHS this cannot be reformed as it is echoed by European regulations. This could be changed after Brexit.	pro	
competition law has prevented the nhs from enacting mergers that could improve care and reduce costs.	1_1.7.4.2.	Competition law has prevented the NHS from enacting mergers that could improve care and reduce costs.	pro	
competition law has allowed private health providers to challenge the nhs for failure to refer services, creating expensive legal fees. this risks clinicians within the nhs experiencing a "chilling effect" whereby they are discouraged from referring patients to public providers, over private ones, even when it is the best clinical decision.	1_1.7.4.3.	Competition law has allowed private health providers to challenge the NHS for failure to refer services, creating expensive legal fees. This risks clinicians within the NHS experiencing a "chilling effect" whereby they are discouraged from referring patients to public providers, over private ones, even when it is the best clinical decision.	pro	
eu competition law only applies to 'undertakings'. when acting in a way connected with 'the exercise of the powers of a public authority', or providing services based on solidarity, an entity is not an undertaking. the nhs therefore does not have to qualify as an 'undertaking' for the purpose of eu competition law. (case cjeu: wouters v algemene raad van de nederlandsche orde van advocaten, , 2002, paragraph 57	1_1.7.4.4.	EU competition law only applies to 'undertakings'. When acting in a way connected with 'the exercise of the powers of a public authority', or providing services based on solidarity, an entity is not an undertaking. The NHS therefore does not have to qualify as an 'undertaking' for the purpose of EU competition law. (Case CJEU: Wouters v Algemene Raad van de Nederlandsche Orde van Advocaten, , 2002, paragraph 57	con	Scotland and Wales essentially avoid competition law by not treating health services as commercial agreements, but rather as something provided as a public service. This is consistent with the EU regulations and could be followed throughout the UK without Brexit (Collins, B. 2015 pg. 5
scotland and wales essentially avoid competition law by not treating health services as commercial agreements, but rather as something provided as a public service. this is consistent with the eu regulations and could be followed throughout the uk without brexit (collins, b. 2015 pg. 5	1_1.7.4.4.1.	Scotland and Wales essentially avoid competition law by not treating health services as commercial agreements, but rather as something provided as a public service. This is consistent with the EU regulations and could be followed throughout the UK without Brexit (Collins, B. 2015 pg. 5	con	
a hard brexit could improve the quality of service provision and medical staff.	1_1.7.5.	A hard Brexit could improve the quality of service provision and medical staff.	pro	The EU working time directive, which restricts the amount of work a week to 48 hours, has had significant benefits for healthcare staff but it is also inflexible. This inflexibility has a negative effect on the training of doctors.	After Brexit, the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council could require competency tests for practitioners who trained in the EU. This is relevant as there is considerable variation in the way doctors are trained across Europe	After Brexit UK doctors, and by extension their patients, will be unable to access the European Reference Networks. These networks bring together experts from around Europe to assist in caring for patients with rare diseases. This loss will reduce the quality of care these people receive.	The Special EU Programmes Body funds specific initiatives in Northern Ireland that tackle the problems caused by having a border. These include initiatives aimed at supporting children with mental health needs and community care. The vast majority of this funding comes from the EU.
the eu working time directive, which restricts the amount of work a week to 48 hours, has had significant benefits for healthcare staff but it is also inflexible. this inflexibility has a negative effect on the training of doctors.	1_1.7.5.1.	The EU working time directive, which restricts the amount of work a week to 48 hours, has had significant benefits for healthcare staff but it is also inflexible. This inflexibility has a negative effect on the training of doctors.	pro	The minor changes required to make the working time directive more flexible for training are already being considered by EU bodies in coordination with UK authorities. Such reforms that are beneficial to the UK can take place within the EU.
the minor changes required to make the working time directive more flexible for training are already being considered by eu bodies in coordination with uk authorities. such reforms that are beneficial to the uk can take place within the eu.	1_1.7.5.1.1.	The minor changes required to make the working time directive more flexible for training are already being considered by EU bodies in coordination with UK authorities. Such reforms that are beneficial to the UK can take place within the EU.	con	
after brexit, the general medical council and the nursing and midwifery council could require competency tests for practitioners who trained in the eu. this is relevant as there is considerable variation in the way doctors are trained across europe	1_1.7.5.2.	After Brexit, the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council could require competency tests for practitioners who trained in the EU. This is relevant as there is considerable variation in the way doctors are trained across Europe	pro	Oncologists in the UK are trained in both radiation and chemotherapy, whereas in some parts of Europe they may focus on one (House of Commons pg. 25
oncologists in the uk are trained in both radiation and chemotherapy, whereas in some parts of europe they may focus on one (house of commons pg. 25	1_1.7.5.2.1.	Oncologists in the UK are trained in both radiation and chemotherapy, whereas in some parts of Europe they may focus on one (House of Commons pg. 25	pro	
after brexit uk doctors, and by extension their patients, will be unable to access the european reference networks. these networks bring together experts from around europe to assist in caring for patients with rare diseases. this loss will reduce the quality of care these people receive.	1_1.7.5.3.	After Brexit UK doctors, and by extension their patients, will be unable to access the European Reference Networks. These networks bring together experts from around Europe to assist in caring for patients with rare diseases. This loss will reduce the quality of care these people receive.	con	
the special eu programmes body funds specific initiatives in northern ireland that tackle the problems caused by having a border. these include initiatives aimed at supporting children with mental health needs and community care. the vast majority of this funding comes from the eu.	1_1.7.5.4.	The Special EU Programmes Body funds specific initiatives in Northern Ireland that tackle the problems caused by having a border. These include initiatives aimed at supporting children with mental health needs and community care. The vast majority of this funding comes from the EU.	con	
brexit will interfere with the supply of goods for the nhs.	1_1.7.6.	Brexit will interfere with the supply of goods for the NHS.	con	Continued EU membership guarantees the long term security of medicines.	Many goods supplied to the NHS have complex supply chains. For example, the main supplier of NHS needles produces them in Plymouth but distributes them from Belgium. A hard Brexit will interrupt this movement of products and increase their cost.	Some medical goods, such as radioisotopes and a number of biological agents, have a shelf-life that's measured in hours. Any delay at customs could be detrimental.	The depreciation of the Pound against the Euro has already cost the NHS considerably as at least half of the products used come from overseas. It is likely that a hard Brexit would cause a further depreciation of the value of the Pound.
continued eu membership guarantees the long term security of medicines.	1_1.7.6.1.	Continued EU membership guarantees the long term security of medicines.	con	
many goods supplied to the nhs have complex supply chains. for example, the main supplier of nhs needles produces them in plymouth but distributes them from belgium. a hard brexit will interrupt this movement of products and increase their cost.	1_1.7.6.2.	Many goods supplied to the NHS have complex supply chains. For example, the main supplier of NHS needles produces them in Plymouth but distributes them from Belgium. A hard Brexit will interrupt this movement of products and increase their cost.	con	
some medical goods, such as radioisotopes and a number of biological agents, have a shelf-life that's measured in hours. any delay at customs could be detrimental.	1_1.7.6.3.	Some medical goods, such as radioisotopes and a number of biological agents, have a shelf-life that's measured in hours. Any delay at customs could be detrimental.	con	The UK government would unquestionably put in place arrangements to prevent customs delay on inward movement of such goods.
the uk government would unquestionably put in place arrangements to prevent customs delay on inward movement of such goods.	1_1.7.6.3.1.	The UK government would unquestionably put in place arrangements to prevent customs delay on inward movement of such goods.	pro	
the depreciation of the pound against the euro has already cost the nhs considerably as at least half of the products used come from overseas. it is likely that a hard brexit would cause a further depreciation of the value of the pound.	1_1.7.6.4.	The depreciation of the Pound against the Euro has already cost the NHS considerably as at least half of the products used come from overseas. It is likely that a hard Brexit would cause a further depreciation of the value of the Pound.	con	Since the announcement of Brexit the value of the pound has dropped.
a large number of british pensioners are able to live in europe and receive healthcare from european systems because of britain's membership of the eu. if the uk were to leave, some of these pensioners would have to return, costing the nhs (on net) approximately half a billion pounds.	1_1.7.7.	A large number of British pensioners are able to live in Europe and receive healthcare from European systems because of Britain's membership of the EU. If the UK were to leave, some of these pensioners would have to return, costing the NHS (on net) approximately half a billion pounds.	con	The estimate of increased costs is highly derived and unclear if it is true or not. The report only considers the cost to the NHS of pensioners returning to the UK, getting older and using more services. It does not consider the economic benefit of those pensioners spending their money locally which will bolster UK tax revenue, rather than that of Spain or France.	That the NHS is so much less efficient than the health services of other EU countries is a reason for NHS reform, not a reason not to leave the EU.	In the grand scheme of things, half a billion pounds is not very much (it would fund the NHS for around 1.5 days, based on a yearly budget of £116 billion.
the estimate of increased costs is highly derived and unclear if it is true or not. the report only considers the cost to the nhs of pensioners returning to the uk, getting older and using more services. it does not consider the economic benefit of those pensioners spending their money locally which will bolster uk tax revenue, rather than that of spain or france.	1_1.7.7.1.	The estimate of increased costs is highly derived and unclear if it is true or not. The report only considers the cost to the NHS of pensioners returning to the UK, getting older and using more services. It does not consider the economic benefit of those pensioners spending their money locally which will bolster UK tax revenue, rather than that of Spain or France.	pro	
that the nhs is so much less efficient than the health services of other eu countries is a reason for nhs reform, not a reason not to leave the eu.	1_1.7.7.2.	That the NHS is so much less efficient than the health services of other EU countries is a reason for NHS reform, not a reason not to leave the EU.	pro	
in the grand scheme of things, half a billion pounds is not very much (it would fund the nhs for around 1.5 days, based on a yearly budget of £116 billion.	1_1.7.7.3.	In the grand scheme of things, half a billion pounds is not very much (it would fund the NHS for around 1.5 days, based on a yearly budget of £116 billion.	pro	
currently new medicines used in the uk need to be approved by the european medical authority. after brexit the equivalent uk body could be more flexible and fast-track the approval of medicines, which had already been approved by other regulators (including the european and american authorities).	1_1.7.8.	Currently new medicines used in the UK need to be approved by the European Medical Authority. After Brexit the equivalent UK body could be more flexible and fast-track the approval of medicines, which had already been approved by other regulators (including the European and American Authorities).	pro	A pharmaceutical company looking to market their drug will have the choice between two markets: a one-country UK, or a 27-country European Union. Pharmaceutical companies are a business, and the most effective strategy would be to sell to as many countries (and therefore people) as possible -- this means the UK will be second-choice (or later) in the pecking order for medicine approval, meaning it won't "fast-track" drugs, but instead the converse.	The UK has been far more stringent in its application of the Clinical Trials Directive than other EU members.	That is an extremely dangerous practice. Fast tracking medicines without proper approval systems will lead to mistakes being made. The EU has a lengthy approval process to protect peoples health from profit hungry pharmaceutical companies.
a pharmaceutical company looking to market their drug will have the choice between two markets: a one-country uk, or a 27-country european union. pharmaceutical companies are a business, and the most effective strategy would be to sell to as many countries (and therefore people) as possible -- this means the uk will be second-choice (or later) in the pecking order for medicine approval, meaning it won't "fast-track" drugs, but instead the converse.	1_1.7.8.1.	A pharmaceutical company looking to market their drug will have the choice between two markets: a one-country UK, or a 27-country European Union. Pharmaceutical companies are a business, and the most effective strategy would be to sell to as many countries (and therefore people) as possible -- this means the UK will be second-choice (or later) in the pecking order for medicine approval, meaning it won't "fast-track" drugs, but instead the converse.	con	
that is an extremely dangerous practice. fast tracking medicines without proper approval systems will lead to mistakes being made. the eu has a lengthy approval process to protect peoples health from profit hungry pharmaceutical companies.	1_1.7.8.3.	That is an extremely dangerous practice. Fast tracking medicines without proper approval systems will lead to mistakes being made. The EU has a lengthy approval process to protect peoples health from profit hungry pharmaceutical companies.	con	
when the uk tightened its immigration policy for non-eu citizens this had a negative effect on recruitment of hospital staff. it is likely a restriction on eu immigrants would have the same effect.	1_1.7.9.	When the UK tightened its immigration policy for non-EU citizens this had a negative effect on recruitment of hospital staff. It is likely a restriction on EU immigrants would have the same effect.	con	The UK has just increased immigration quotas for doctors and nurses from non-EU countries showing that it is not necessary to have completely unfettered free movement in order to effect adequate NHS recruitment from other countries.	Leaving the EU means we could lose over 4,500 NHS nurses, among many other skilled workers that come from the EU.	From the 2016/17 year to the 2017/2018 year, there has been an 87% reduction in nursing registrants from EU countries since the referendum.	The immigration policy won't be applying to just the eu. The whole point is we have one policy applied to the whole world encouraging those with skills to come here. Hospital staff constitute those with skills and thus there will be allowances for those coming here to fill those jobs. Infact instead of non eu citizens who could work as hospital staff being blocked because numbers of internal non skilled eu immigrants were too high and thus external skilled quotas had to be cut.	Looking solely at the number of recruits and not the quality of recruits gives a misleading picture. Recruiting large numbers of staff with poor technical and/or language skills is not a good long term strategy for the NHS.	EU immigrants make up only 5% of NHS staff, therefore the effect will not be so pronounced.	About 10% of doctors come from the EU, leaving this workforce is particularly vulnerable to reductions in immigration.
the uk has just increased immigration quotas for doctors and nurses from non-eu countries showing that it is not necessary to have completely unfettered free movement in order to effect adequate nhs recruitment from other countries.	1_1.7.9.1.	The UK has just increased immigration quotas for doctors and nurses from non-EU countries showing that it is not necessary to have completely unfettered free movement in order to effect adequate NHS recruitment from other countries.	pro	Other EU nations like Austria currently restrict EU migrants using existing EU laws. Theresa May merely chose not to do so when she was Home Secretary. Brexit was never necessary to restrict migration from the EU.
from the 2016/17 year to the 2017/2018 year, there has been an 87% reduction in nursing registrants from eu countries since the referendum.	1_1.7.9.3.	From the 2016/17 year to the 2017/2018 year, there has been an 87% reduction in nursing registrants from EU countries since the referendum.	con	There have recently been strict new English proficiency tests that are preventing many people being eligible to apply for nursing positions, and so it is not clear whether the referendum has had a significant impact on nursing applications.	Numbers of non-EU international nurse recruits has increased markedly since the 2016 referendum, and are at their highest levels since 2007/08. In 2017/18 overall international registrants were higher than in 2009/10 or 2010/11, suggesting fears of a collapse in international recruits are overblown.
there have recently been strict new english proficiency tests that are preventing many people being eligible to apply for nursing positions, and so it is not clear whether the referendum has had a significant impact on nursing applications.	1_1.7.9.3.1.	There have recently been strict new English proficiency tests that are preventing many people being eligible to apply for nursing positions, and so it is not clear whether the referendum has had a significant impact on nursing applications.	pro	
numbers of non-eu international nurse recruits has increased markedly since the 2016 referendum, and are at their highest levels since 2007/08. in 2017/18 overall international registrants were higher than in 2009/10 or 2010/11, suggesting fears of a collapse in international recruits are overblown.	1_1.7.9.3.2.	Numbers of non-EU international nurse recruits has increased markedly since the 2016 referendum, and are at their highest levels since 2007/08. In 2017/18 overall international registrants were higher than in 2009/10 or 2010/11, suggesting fears of a collapse in international recruits are overblown.	pro	The source indicates that the inflow of nurses from non-EU countries has not increased enough to compensate for the drop from EU nursing applicants.
the source indicates that the inflow of nurses from non-eu countries has not increased enough to compensate for the drop from eu nursing applicants.	1_1.7.9.3.2.1.	The source indicates that the inflow of nurses from non-EU countries has not increased enough to compensate for the drop from EU nursing applicants.	con	
the immigration policy won't be applying to just the eu. the whole point is we have one policy applied to the whole world encouraging those with skills to come here. hospital staff constitute those with skills and thus there will be allowances for those coming here to fill those jobs. infact instead of non eu citizens who could work as hospital staff being blocked because numbers of internal non skilled eu immigrants were too high and thus external skilled quotas had to be cut.	1_1.7.9.4.	The immigration policy won't be applying to just the eu. The whole point is we have one policy applied to the whole world encouraging those with skills to come here. Hospital staff constitute those with skills and thus there will be allowances for those coming here to fill those jobs. Infact instead of non eu citizens who could work as hospital staff being blocked because numbers of internal non skilled eu immigrants were too high and thus external skilled quotas had to be cut.	pro	
looking solely at the number of recruits and not the quality of recruits gives a misleading picture. recruiting large numbers of staff with poor technical and/or language skills is not a good long term strategy for the nhs.	1_1.7.9.5.	Looking solely at the number of recruits and not the quality of recruits gives a misleading picture. Recruiting large numbers of staff with poor technical and/or language skills is not a good long term strategy for the NHS.	pro	There have recently been strict new English proficiency tests that are preventing many people being eligible to apply for nursing positions, and so it is not clear whether the referendum has had a significant impact on nursing applications.
eu immigrants make up only 5% of nhs staff, therefore the effect will not be so pronounced.	1_1.7.9.6.	EU immigrants make up only 5% of NHS staff, therefore the effect will not be so pronounced.	pro	The impact of losing 5% of NHS staff will be more pronounced as the system is already under the strain of staff shortages. theguardian.com	The "Hostile environment" towards immigrants created by Theresa May and compounded by Brexit will not only make NHS recruitment much more difficult from the EU, but for medical staff from outside the EU too.	The NHS is one of the largest employers in the world employing just over a million "full time equivalent" posts - "only" 5% is roughly 50,000 FTEs - more than we're already short by for nurses e.g. 40,000 nurse FTEs.
the impact of losing 5% of nhs staff will be more pronounced as the system is already under the strain of staff shortages. theguardian.com	1_1.7.9.6.1.	The impact of losing 5% of NHS staff will be more pronounced as the system is already under the strain of staff shortages. theguardian.com	con	
the "hostile environment" towards immigrants created by theresa may and compounded by brexit will not only make nhs recruitment much more difficult from the eu, but for medical staff from outside the eu too.	1_1.7.9.6.2.	The "Hostile environment" towards immigrants created by Theresa May and compounded by Brexit will not only make NHS recruitment much more difficult from the EU, but for medical staff from outside the EU too.	con	The 'Hostile Environment' refers ONLY to illegal immigrants not to legal ones."We’re going to give illegal migrants a really hostile reception".
the 'hostile environment' refers only to illegal immigrants not to legal ones."we’re going to give illegal migrants a really hostile reception".	1_1.7.9.6.2.1.	The 'Hostile Environment' refers ONLY to illegal immigrants not to legal ones."We’re going to give illegal migrants a really hostile reception".	pro	That was the stated goal, but it worked out that lots of legal immigrants were targeted too.
that was the stated goal, but it worked out that lots of legal immigrants were targeted too.	1_1.7.9.6.2.1.1.	That was the stated goal, but it worked out that lots of legal immigrants were targeted too.	con	
the nhs is one of the largest employers in the world employing just over a million "full time equivalent" posts - "only" 5% is roughly 50,000 ftes - more than we're already short by for nurses e.g. 40,000 nurse ftes.	1_1.7.9.6.3.	The NHS is one of the largest employers in the world employing just over a million "full time equivalent" posts - "only" 5% is roughly 50,000 FTEs - more than we're already short by for nurses e.g. 40,000 nurse FTEs.	con	
about 10% of doctors come from the eu, leaving this workforce is particularly vulnerable to reductions in immigration.	1_1.7.9.7.	About 10% of doctors come from the EU, leaving this workforce is particularly vulnerable to reductions in immigration.	con	The UK has just increased immigration quotas for doctors and nurses from non-EU countries showing that it is not necessary to have completely unfettered free movement in order to effect adequate NHS recruitment from other countries.	Almost a third of newly-registered nurses in the UK had trained in the EEA. (2016)
almost a third of newly-registered nurses in the uk had trained in the eea. (2016)	1_1.7.9.7.2.	Almost a third of newly-registered nurses in the UK had trained in the EEA. (2016)	con	
the caribbean island of anguilla is a british overseas territory. it relies heavily on access to the neighbouring island of st maarten, which is a french territory and therefore in the eu, especially for medical care. the islanders' access to healthcare will be devastated in the event of a hard brexit, as there are currently no backup plans.	1_1.7.10.	The Caribbean island of Anguilla is a British Overseas Territory. It relies heavily on access to the neighbouring island of St Maarten, which is a French territory and therefore in the EU, especially for medical care. The islanders' access to healthcare will be devastated in the event of a Hard Brexit, as there are currently no backup plans.	con	
the supremacy of eu law impinges on britain's ability to make laws to govern itself; by exiting the eu, britain can make rules on any area it chooses.	1_1.8.	The supremacy of EU law impinges on Britain's ability to make laws to govern itself; by exiting the EU, Britain can make rules on any area it chooses.	pro	EU legislation around areas such as employment rights offers a framework of minimum standards to protect workers. Each EU member can improve on those standards through its own legislation. We already do so on matters such as holiday pay.	The minimal amount of sovereignty Britain may win back from Europe is useless if it inhibits future governments from maintaining British prosperity. A Hard Brexit, with its economic and political consequences, calls this into question.	The future trajectory of the EU as a political union is incompatible with the UK retaining its sovereignty.	The EU is a neoliberal institution. As part of it, Britain is unable to pursue socialist economic policies, even if it was democratically mandated.	EU laws have supremacy over the national laws of the UK.	Brexit legislation has weakened parliamentary sovereignty. Government ministers can amend or repeal legislation without the need for parliamentary scrutiny, known as "Henry VIII laws".	It is unrealistic to expect that Britain will have perfect supremacy over its own laws, irrespective of its relationship with the EU.	This aim is unlikely to be achieved as new trade deals bring in new regulations. Examples include American patent law and ability for coporates to sue governments.	The extra layer of jurisdiction means that UK citizens can appeal to a higher court if they feel domestic law does not implement the rights of citizens that are described in EU law correctly, such as equal pay.	The EU consists of member states that often have conflicting interests with clear winners and losers in any given piece of legislation, regulation, etc. It is better for nation states to control their own destinies.
eu legislation around areas such as employment rights offers a framework of minimum standards to protect workers. each eu member can improve on those standards through its own legislation. we already do so on matters such as holiday pay.	1_1.8.1.	EU legislation around areas such as employment rights offers a framework of minimum standards to protect workers. Each EU member can improve on those standards through its own legislation. We already do so on matters such as holiday pay.	con	
the minimal amount of sovereignty britain may win back from europe is useless if it inhibits future governments from maintaining british prosperity. a hard brexit, with its economic and political consequences, calls this into question.	1_1.8.2.	The minimal amount of sovereignty Britain may win back from Europe is useless if it inhibits future governments from maintaining British prosperity. A Hard Brexit, with its economic and political consequences, calls this into question.	con	
the future trajectory of the eu as a political union is incompatible with the uk retaining its sovereignty.	1_1.8.3.	The future trajectory of the EU as a political union is incompatible with the UK retaining its sovereignty.	pro	The European Union is planning on replacing the veto system of taxation for a qualified majority system. This movement of powers up is incompatible with the UK who are attempting to devolve powers such as taxation downwards, see differing income tax between Scotland and England for an example.
the european union is planning on replacing the veto system of taxation for a qualified majority system. this movement of powers up is incompatible with the uk who are attempting to devolve powers such as taxation downwards, see differing income tax between scotland and england for an example.	1_1.8.3.1.	The European Union is planning on replacing the veto system of taxation for a qualified majority system. This movement of powers up is incompatible with the UK who are attempting to devolve powers such as taxation downwards, see differing income tax between Scotland and England for an example.	pro	The EU's Principle of Subsidiarity leaves decisions that are more efficiently taken at a national/regional level down to the respective nations or regions. (Article 5(3) of the Treaty on European Union
the eu is a neoliberal institution. as part of it, britain is unable to pursue socialist economic policies, even if it was democratically mandated.	1_1.8.4.	The EU is a neoliberal institution. As part of it, Britain is unable to pursue socialist economic policies, even if it was democratically mandated.	pro	EU rules do not push privatisation. The EU is constitutionally required to be neutral as regards public ownership or privatisation, and doesn’t prevent nationalisation of already privatised companies or the setting up of new ones.	The ban on tariffs means countries cannot pursue protectionist economic policies to ensure domestic industries survive.	The EU pursued austerity policies in Greece, against the Greek people's wishes. This was made possible by the ECB, an EU institution.	EU employment law provides some of the strongest safeguards for workers in the world.	The past six UK prime ministers (Thatcher, Major, Blair, Brown, Cameron, and May have run government's with neoliberal policies. The UK does not want to pursue socialists economic policies, so it's ability to do so has never actually come under consideration.	The EU is only a sum of the wills of its member states. If the UK citizenry wants to make the EU have more left-wing or protectionist policies, they can vote that way such that their domestic government and EU representatives will advocate for them.	EU membership hasn't prevented Sweden and Denmark's strong workers' rights, nor the Universal Basic Income in Finland.
eu rules do not push privatisation. the eu is constitutionally required to be neutral as regards public ownership or privatisation, and doesn’t prevent nationalisation of already privatised companies or the setting up of new ones.	1_1.8.4.1.	EU rules do not push privatisation. The EU is constitutionally required to be neutral as regards public ownership or privatisation, and doesn’t prevent nationalisation of already privatised companies or the setting up of new ones.	con	The EU restricts interventionist government.
the eu restricts interventionist government.	1_1.8.4.1.1.	The EU restricts interventionist government.	pro	
the ban on tariffs means countries cannot pursue protectionist economic policies to ensure domestic industries survive.	1_1.8.4.2.	The ban on tariffs means countries cannot pursue protectionist economic policies to ensure domestic industries survive.	pro	The single market removes tariffs for its members, which is possible because it creates a level playing field with regulations (e.g. on labour, standards and the environment). There still are protective tariffs for exports originating from outside the EU, where rules are different, to prevent those countries gaining a competitive advantage over the EU countries (cheap labour creates cheap products).	The UK does not like protective measures. It rejected the option to put tariffs on steel to protect the domestic steel industry, even when the EU proposed it.
the single market removes tariffs for its members, which is possible because it creates a level playing field with regulations (e.g. on labour, standards and the environment). there still are protective tariffs for exports originating from outside the eu, where rules are different, to prevent those countries gaining a competitive advantage over the eu countries (cheap labour creates cheap products).	1_1.8.4.2.1.	The single market removes tariffs for its members, which is possible because it creates a level playing field with regulations (e.g. on labour, standards and the environment). There still are protective tariffs for exports originating from outside the EU, where rules are different, to prevent those countries gaining a competitive advantage over the EU countries (cheap labour creates cheap products).	con	
the uk does not like protective measures. it rejected the option to put tariffs on steel to protect the domestic steel industry, even when the eu proposed it.	1_1.8.4.2.2.	The UK does not like protective measures. It rejected the option to put tariffs on steel to protect the domestic steel industry, even when the EU proposed it.	con	
the eu pursued austerity policies in greece, against the greek people's wishes. this was made possible by the ecb, an eu institution.	1_1.8.4.3.	The EU pursued austerity policies in Greece, against the Greek people's wishes. This was made possible by the ECB, an EU institution.	pro	When any institution makes a loan they need to ensure such a loan can/will be repaid. It would be highly irresponsible for any organisation not to do so. The Greeks had to raise taxes to cover their spending, or reduce their spending.	The additional loan given to the Greeks was the European Central Bank 's own money, thus they got to choose the terms. If the Greeks had refused then they would have simply defaulted, been forced into bankrupty, and then be forced into even worse austerity
when any institution makes a loan they need to ensure such a loan can/will be repaid. it would be highly irresponsible for any organisation not to do so. the greeks had to raise taxes to cover their spending, or reduce their spending.	1_1.8.4.3.1.	When any institution makes a loan they need to ensure such a loan can/will be repaid. It would be highly irresponsible for any organisation not to do so. The Greeks had to raise taxes to cover their spending, or reduce their spending.	con	
the additional loan given to the greeks was the european central bank 's own money, thus they got to choose the terms. if the greeks had refused then they would have simply defaulted, been forced into bankrupty, and then be forced into even worse austerity	1_1.8.4.3.2.	The additional loan given to the Greeks was the European Central Bank 's own money, thus they got to choose the terms. If the Greeks had refused then they would have simply defaulted, been forced into bankrupty, and then be forced into even worse austerity	con	
eu employment law provides some of the strongest safeguards for workers in the world.	1_1.8.4.4.	EU employment law provides some of the strongest safeguards for workers in the world.	con	
the past six uk prime ministers (thatcher, major, blair, brown, cameron, and may have run government's with neoliberal policies. the uk does not want to pursue socialists economic policies, so it's ability to do so has never actually come under consideration.	1_1.8.4.5.	The past six UK prime ministers (Thatcher, Major, Blair, Brown, Cameron, and May have run government's with neoliberal policies. The UK does not want to pursue socialists economic policies, so it's ability to do so has never actually come under consideration.	con	
the eu is only a sum of the wills of its member states. if the uk citizenry wants to make the eu have more left-wing or protectionist policies, they can vote that way such that their domestic government and eu representatives will advocate for them.	1_1.8.4.6.	The EU is only a sum of the wills of its member states. If the UK citizenry wants to make the EU have more left-wing or protectionist policies, they can vote that way such that their domestic government and EU representatives will advocate for them.	con	Whilst it would be possible for a future UK Socialist government and Socialist MEPs to influence the EU, this alone would not be enough to make a significant difference.
whilst it would be possible for a future uk socialist government and socialist meps to influence the eu, this alone would not be enough to make a significant difference.	1_1.8.4.6.1.	Whilst it would be possible for a future UK Socialist government and Socialist MEPs to influence the EU, this alone would not be enough to make a significant difference.	pro	The majority of the EU countries have centre-right or right leaning parties in government, and extreme nationalist and populist parties like AfD are gaining footholds all over Europe.
the majority of the eu countries have centre-right or right leaning parties in government, and extreme nationalist and populist parties like afd are gaining footholds all over europe.	1_1.8.4.6.1.1.	The majority of the EU countries have centre-right or right leaning parties in government, and extreme nationalist and populist parties like AfD are gaining footholds all over Europe.	pro	Political trends are fluid. Sometimes there's an authoritarian trend, sometimes there's a democratic trend. The parent assumes that just because the atmosphere is such and such today it will stay just like that frozen in time.
political trends are fluid. sometimes there's an authoritarian trend, sometimes there's a democratic trend. the parent assumes that just because the atmosphere is such and such today it will stay just like that frozen in time.	1_1.8.4.6.1.1.1.	Political trends are fluid. Sometimes there's an authoritarian trend, sometimes there's a democratic trend. The parent assumes that just because the atmosphere is such and such today it will stay just like that frozen in time.	con	
eu membership hasn't prevented sweden and denmark's strong workers' rights, nor the universal basic income in finland.	1_1.8.4.7.	EU membership hasn't prevented Sweden and Denmark's strong workers' rights, nor the Universal Basic Income in Finland.	con	
eu laws have supremacy over the national laws of the uk.	1_1.8.5.	EU laws have supremacy over the national laws of the UK.	pro	All supranational laws override national laws. International laws have to override national laws in order to be effective, otherwise governments that break international law can just point to their own national laws and say they acted legally deeming international laws useless.	Despite EU laws technically having supremacy over domestic law, the UK wields substantial influence over both.	Much like in the US Federal laws override state laws. Or UK laws override local council laws.
all supranational laws override national laws. international laws have to override national laws in order to be effective, otherwise governments that break international law can just point to their own national laws and say they acted legally deeming international laws useless.	1_1.8.5.1.	All supranational laws override national laws. International laws have to override national laws in order to be effective, otherwise governments that break international law can just point to their own national laws and say they acted legally deeming international laws useless.	con	Much of international law is consent-based governance. This means that a state member is not obliged to abide by this type of international law, unless it has expressly consented to a particular course of conduct, usually through ratification (making international law/agreements into national law).	And Trade Agreements have supremacy over national laws of the UK. And we will have Trade Agreements anyway.
much of international law is consent-based governance. this means that a state member is not obliged to abide by this type of international law, unless it has expressly consented to a particular course of conduct, usually through ratification (making international law/agreements into national law).	1_1.8.5.1.1.	Much of international law is consent-based governance. This means that a state member is not obliged to abide by this type of international law, unless it has expressly consented to a particular course of conduct, usually through ratification (making international law/agreements into national law).	pro	
and trade agreements have supremacy over national laws of the uk. and we will have trade agreements anyway.	1_1.8.5.1.2.	And Trade Agreements have supremacy over national laws of the UK. And we will have Trade Agreements anyway.	con	
despite eu laws technically having supremacy over domestic law, the uk wields substantial influence over both.	1_1.8.5.2.	Despite EU laws technically having supremacy over domestic law, the UK wields substantial influence over both.	con	True, but as a large and influential EU member state, UK has a big say in the laws that apply EU-wide.	Many of the EU laws and regulations supposedly imposed on the UK were heavily influenced by UK officials working in Whitehall and Brussels. The UK has disproportionate influence across a range of policy areas in the EU and has used this to establish common policies across the EU that benefit the UK.	On the votes in the European Parliament, the majority agreed with the UK in 95% of cases. In 2%, the UK did not express an opinion.	Today, the British government remains solely responsible for the majority of policy actions that matter to voters, such as health, welfare, pensions, border security, defense, and monetary policy.	The United Kingdom controls more than 98 per cent of its public expenditure. (Niblett, 2016, pg. 1.
true, but as a large and influential eu member state, uk has a big say in the laws that apply eu-wide.	1_1.8.5.2.1.	True, but as a large and influential EU member state, UK has a big say in the laws that apply EU-wide.	con	
many of the eu laws and regulations supposedly imposed on the uk were heavily influenced by uk officials working in whitehall and brussels. the uk has disproportionate influence across a range of policy areas in the eu and has used this to establish common policies across the eu that benefit the uk.	1_1.8.5.2.2.	Many of the EU laws and regulations supposedly imposed on the UK were heavily influenced by UK officials working in Whitehall and Brussels. The UK has disproportionate influence across a range of policy areas in the EU and has used this to establish common policies across the EU that benefit the UK.	con	The problem is that once these laws and regulations are established, they are almost impossible to change as they require consensus across the EU. This means that a change in UK government cannot undo what was wanted by a previous government, undermining democracy.
the problem is that once these laws and regulations are established, they are almost impossible to change as they require consensus across the eu. this means that a change in uk government cannot undo what was wanted by a previous government, undermining democracy.	1_1.8.5.2.2.1.	The problem is that once these laws and regulations are established, they are almost impossible to change as they require consensus across the EU. This means that a change in UK government cannot undo what was wanted by a previous government, undermining democracy.	pro	
on the votes in the european parliament, the majority agreed with the uk in 95% of cases. in 2%, the uk did not express an opinion.	1_1.8.5.2.3.	On the votes in the European Parliament, the majority agreed with the UK in 95% of cases. In 2%, the UK did not express an opinion.	con	This still does not mean the UK has any power over the EU because it can't revoke the law when its citizens disagree, therefore it does not have sovereignty.	Because the UK agreed with 95% of all cases does not necessarily mean that in those cases the policies were the most suitable for the UK, as the EU must provide policies that work to some extent for all members. The UK can agree with an EU policy and still believe an alternative option would work better for the UK.
this still does not mean the uk has any power over the eu because it can't revoke the law when its citizens disagree, therefore it does not have sovereignty.	1_1.8.5.2.3.1.	This still does not mean the UK has any power over the EU because it can't revoke the law when its citizens disagree, therefore it does not have sovereignty.	pro	
because the uk agreed with 95% of all cases does not necessarily mean that in those cases the policies were the most suitable for the uk, as the eu must provide policies that work to some extent for all members. the uk can agree with an eu policy and still believe an alternative option would work better for the uk.	1_1.8.5.2.3.2.	Because the UK agreed with 95% of all cases does not necessarily mean that in those cases the policies were the most suitable for the UK, as the EU must provide policies that work to some extent for all members. The UK can agree with an EU policy and still believe an alternative option would work better for the UK.	pro	
today, the british government remains solely responsible for the majority of policy actions that matter to voters, such as health, welfare, pensions, border security, defense, and monetary policy.	1_1.8.5.2.4.	Today, the British government remains solely responsible for the majority of policy actions that matter to voters, such as health, welfare, pensions, border security, defense, and monetary policy.	con	
the united kingdom controls more than 98 per cent of its public expenditure. (niblett, 2016, pg. 1.	1_1.8.5.2.5.	The United Kingdom controls more than 98 per cent of its public expenditure. (Niblett, 2016, pg. 1.	con	
much like in the us federal laws override state laws. or uk laws override local council laws.	1_1.8.5.3.	Much like in the US Federal laws override state laws. Or UK laws override local council laws.	con	
brexit legislation has weakened parliamentary sovereignty. government ministers can amend or repeal legislation without the need for parliamentary scrutiny, known as "henry viii laws".	1_1.8.6.	Brexit legislation has weakened parliamentary sovereignty. Government ministers can amend or repeal legislation without the need for parliamentary scrutiny, known as "Henry VIII laws".	con	
it is unrealistic to expect that britain will have perfect supremacy over its own laws, irrespective of its relationship with the eu.	1_1.8.7.	It is unrealistic to expect that Britain will have perfect supremacy over its own laws, irrespective of its relationship with the EU.	con	With the EU being our largest trading partner, we are likely to align our laws to make trading easier if we were outside it.  We are going to end up with most EU legislation being enacted, we will just be losing the ability to influence those laws.	Leaving the EU will likely lead to an increase in the influence of actors other than the British public on UK law.	It is politically naive to suggest that any country enjoys "full" sovereignty. All countries across the world sacrifice or pool sovereignty when they enter into trade treaties or international institutions, such as NATO, as those treaty obligations override domestic law. What is being asked for here is not achievable and not desirable.
with the eu being our largest trading partner, we are likely to align our laws to make trading easier if we were outside it.  we are going to end up with most eu legislation being enacted, we will just be losing the ability to influence those laws.	1_1.8.7.1.	With the EU being our largest trading partner, we are likely to align our laws to make trading easier if we were outside it.  We are going to end up with most EU legislation being enacted, we will just be losing the ability to influence those laws.	con	Even if current EU legislation is incorporated into UK law, the UK parliament can amend or repeal those laws in the future whenever there is will to do so and any further EU legislation can (or not) be incorporated at the will of parliament.	The UK will still be able to make its own laws in sectors apart from trade, such as the environment, taxes, education, and justice, to name a few.
even if current eu legislation is incorporated into uk law, the uk parliament can amend or repeal those laws in the future whenever there is will to do so and any further eu legislation can (or not) be incorporated at the will of parliament.	1_1.8.7.1.1.	Even if current EU legislation is incorporated into UK law, the UK parliament can amend or repeal those laws in the future whenever there is will to do so and any further EU legislation can (or not) be incorporated at the will of parliament.	pro	
the uk will still be able to make its own laws in sectors apart from trade, such as the environment, taxes, education, and justice, to name a few.	1_1.8.7.1.2.	The UK will still be able to make its own laws in sectors apart from trade, such as the environment, taxes, education, and justice, to name a few.	pro	
leaving the eu will likely lead to an increase in the influence of actors other than the british public on uk law.	1_1.8.7.2.	Leaving the EU will likely lead to an increase in the influence of actors other than the British public on UK law.	con	The UK will have to strike deals with both the EU and third countries, which will require it to make concessions. It will probably have to accept, to some extent, the laws of the EU, especially if it wants to trade. It may even have to accept some regulatory alignment with third countries. The ability to choose not to be subjected to those rules is limited by the power the UK has vis-à-vis other countries. The UK may have less power on its own than as part of the EU.	The US food industry has already proposed bringing chlorinated, contaminated chicken into the UK. It’s going to be far more likely that the government will accept lowered food standards from third countries for the bump in GDP that results from the trade. Without the EU to trade with and the protections and standards they provide, it’s going to be tempting to sacrifice a bit of public health for the cash offered by a powerful US food lobby.	Multinational companies will be able to exert leverage on UK employment law by threatening to move jobs out of the UK, whereas they would be less able to use this negotiating tactic to influence EU-wide employment laws.	Any marginal increase in external lobbying represents less of a problematic influence than that of the EU's direct sovereignty over UK institutions.	Some prospective trading partners prefer arbitration of agreements/treaties pertaining to trade to be conducted by industry panels, not courts. This not only reduces transparency and therefore accountability, it also allows foreign private companies to sue the government for changing laws that they deem to be detrimental to their profits/competitiveness.	The UK government will still want to influence EU laws and regulations, but will do that by lobbying. This occurs mostly behind closed doors, and is therefore less transparent and accountable than having UK citizens in the European Parliament, and in various other positions in the EU.
the uk will have to strike deals with both the eu and third countries, which will require it to make concessions. it will probably have to accept, to some extent, the laws of the eu, especially if it wants to trade. it may even have to accept some regulatory alignment with third countries. the ability to choose not to be subjected to those rules is limited by the power the uk has vis-à-vis other countries. the uk may have less power on its own than as part of the eu.	1_1.8.7.2.1.	The UK will have to strike deals with both the EU and third countries, which will require it to make concessions. It will probably have to accept, to some extent, the laws of the EU, especially if it wants to trade. It may even have to accept some regulatory alignment with third countries. The ability to choose not to be subjected to those rules is limited by the power the UK has vis-à-vis other countries. The UK may have less power on its own than as part of the EU.	con	
the us food industry has already proposed bringing chlorinated, contaminated chicken into the uk. it’s going to be far more likely that the government will accept lowered food standards from third countries for the bump in gdp that results from the trade. without the eu to trade with and the protections and standards they provide, it’s going to be tempting to sacrifice a bit of public health for the cash offered by a powerful us food lobby.	1_1.8.7.2.2.	The US food industry has already proposed bringing chlorinated, contaminated chicken into the UK. It’s going to be far more likely that the government will accept lowered food standards from third countries for the bump in GDP that results from the trade. Without the EU to trade with and the protections and standards they provide, it’s going to be tempting to sacrifice a bit of public health for the cash offered by a powerful US food lobby.	con	
multinational companies will be able to exert leverage on uk employment law by threatening to move jobs out of the uk, whereas they would be less able to use this negotiating tactic to influence eu-wide employment laws.	1_1.8.7.2.3.	Multinational companies will be able to exert leverage on UK employment law by threatening to move jobs out of the UK, whereas they would be less able to use this negotiating tactic to influence EU-wide employment laws.	con	
any marginal increase in external lobbying represents less of a problematic influence than that of the eu's direct sovereignty over uk institutions.	1_1.8.7.2.4.	Any marginal increase in external lobbying represents less of a problematic influence than that of the EU's direct sovereignty over UK institutions.	pro	External lobbying only attempts to influence the UK, and does not have direct authority to mandate a change to UK law. Thus, the influence of lobbying is more easily resisted and less of a significant threat to sovereignty.
external lobbying only attempts to influence the uk, and does not have direct authority to mandate a change to uk law. thus, the influence of lobbying is more easily resisted and less of a significant threat to sovereignty.	1_1.8.7.2.4.1.	External lobbying only attempts to influence the UK, and does not have direct authority to mandate a change to UK law. Thus, the influence of lobbying is more easily resisted and less of a significant threat to sovereignty.	pro	Evidence from the US indicates that lobbying groups can have a very strong influence on laws and government spending.
evidence from the us indicates that lobbying groups can have a very strong influence on laws and government spending.	1_1.8.7.2.4.1.1.	Evidence from the US indicates that lobbying groups can have a very strong influence on laws and government spending.	con	
some prospective trading partners prefer arbitration of agreements/treaties pertaining to trade to be conducted by industry panels, not courts. this not only reduces transparency and therefore accountability, it also allows foreign private companies to sue the government for changing laws that they deem to be detrimental to their profits/competitiveness.	1_1.8.7.2.5.	Some prospective trading partners prefer arbitration of agreements/treaties pertaining to trade to be conducted by industry panels, not courts. This not only reduces transparency and therefore accountability, it also allows foreign private companies to sue the government for changing laws that they deem to be detrimental to their profits/competitiveness.	con	
the uk government will still want to influence eu laws and regulations, but will do that by lobbying. this occurs mostly behind closed doors, and is therefore less transparent and accountable than having uk citizens in the european parliament, and in various other positions in the eu.	1_1.8.7.2.6.	The UK government will still want to influence EU laws and regulations, but will do that by lobbying. This occurs mostly behind closed doors, and is therefore less transparent and accountable than having UK citizens in the European Parliament, and in various other positions in the EU.	con	
it is politically naive to suggest that any country enjoys "full" sovereignty. all countries across the world sacrifice or pool sovereignty when they enter into trade treaties or international institutions, such as nato, as those treaty obligations override domestic law. what is being asked for here is not achievable and not desirable.	1_1.8.7.3.	It is politically naive to suggest that any country enjoys "full" sovereignty. All countries across the world sacrifice or pool sovereignty when they enter into trade treaties or international institutions, such as NATO, as those treaty obligations override domestic law. What is being asked for here is not achievable and not desirable.	con	
this aim is unlikely to be achieved as new trade deals bring in new regulations. examples include american patent law and ability for coporates to sue governments.	1_1.8.8.	This aim is unlikely to be achieved as new trade deals bring in new regulations. Examples include American patent law and ability for coporates to sue governments.	con	
the extra layer of jurisdiction means that uk citizens can appeal to a higher court if they feel domestic law does not implement the rights of citizens that are described in eu law correctly, such as equal pay.	1_1.8.9.	The extra layer of jurisdiction means that UK citizens can appeal to a higher court if they feel domestic law does not implement the rights of citizens that are described in EU law correctly, such as equal pay.	con	The ECJ takes a purposive approach to interpreting EU regulation that expands its authority rather than respecting member states' sovereignty (Alter, p. 656).
the ecj takes a purposive approach to interpreting eu regulation that expands its authority rather than respecting member states' sovereignty (alter, p. 656).	1_1.8.9.1.	The ECJ takes a purposive approach to interpreting EU regulation that expands its authority rather than respecting member states' sovereignty (Alter, p. 656).	pro	
the eu consists of member states that often have conflicting interests with clear winners and losers in any given piece of legislation, regulation, etc. it is better for nation states to control their own destinies.	1_1.8.10.	The EU consists of member states that often have conflicting interests with clear winners and losers in any given piece of legislation, regulation, etc. It is better for nation states to control their own destinies.	pro	EU legislation undergoes fierce bargaining and is a result of compromise more often than not. In most cases member states ask for something in return in order to agree with some legislation.	Decision making on a clearly national basis wouldn't avoid competition between national interests, and would facilitate zero sum situations as bigger nations would have no institutional checks on their power. This would only deprive EU nations of the platform and means to negotiate their differences in a peacefull, effective and mutually beneficial way.	No nation state controls its own destiny in anintensely globalized world. Giant players on the global stage (e.g. Exxon-Mobil, Microsoft, General Electric), manipulate national politics, preferring smaller, weaker states (less likely to regulate and tax them). The British electorate's interests are low priority for them, as opinions are easily manipulated via the popular press. Multilateral Organisations allow national governments to collaborate and retain power to act in the people's interests.	Inside or outside of the EU, Britain is still beholden to the same tides of international politics and economics (which are outside of the control of any one state) that drive the rules and policies of individual states. As an EU member, Britain wields far more power and authority to deal with trans-national players (e.g. corporations and their lobbyists, rebel groups, cross-border rogue states etc) and navigate these tides than if it stands alone.	Even big corporations are bound by law, wether it be national or international, thus ways remain to limit their capacity for interference in national politics.	The EU itself lacks transparency and is very much affected by lobbying from big corporations. It is not an exaggeration to say that there is even less control from the people in this instance than there would be were the national state the only institution to be considered, in the absence of the EU.
eu legislation undergoes fierce bargaining and is a result of compromise more often than not. in most cases member states ask for something in return in order to agree with some legislation.	1_1.8.10.1.	EU legislation undergoes fierce bargaining and is a result of compromise more often than not. In most cases member states ask for something in return in order to agree with some legislation.	con	
decision making on a clearly national basis wouldn't avoid competition between national interests, and would facilitate zero sum situations as bigger nations would have no institutional checks on their power. this would only deprive eu nations of the platform and means to negotiate their differences in a peacefull, effective and mutually beneficial way.	1_1.8.10.2.	Decision making on a clearly national basis wouldn't avoid competition between national interests, and would facilitate zero sum situations as bigger nations would have no institutional checks on their power. This would only deprive EU nations of the platform and means to negotiate their differences in a peacefull, effective and mutually beneficial way.	con	
no nation state controls its own destiny in anintensely globalized world. giant players on the global stage (e.g. exxon-mobil, microsoft, general electric), manipulate national politics, preferring smaller, weaker states (less likely to regulate and tax them). the british electorate's interests are low priority for them, as opinions are easily manipulated via the popular press. multilateral organisations allow national governments to collaborate and retain power to act in the people's interests.	1_1.8.10.3.	No nation state controls its own destiny in anintensely globalized world. Giant players on the global stage (e.g. Exxon-Mobil, Microsoft, General Electric), manipulate national politics, preferring smaller, weaker states (less likely to regulate and tax them). The British electorate's interests are low priority for them, as opinions are easily manipulated via the popular press. Multilateral Organisations allow national governments to collaborate and retain power to act in the people's interests.	con	
inside or outside of the eu, britain is still beholden to the same tides of international politics and economics (which are outside of the control of any one state) that drive the rules and policies of individual states. as an eu member, britain wields far more power and authority to deal with trans-national players (e.g. corporations and their lobbyists, rebel groups, cross-border rogue states etc) and navigate these tides than if it stands alone.	1_1.8.10.4.	Inside or outside of the EU, Britain is still beholden to the same tides of international politics and economics (which are outside of the control of any one state) that drive the rules and policies of individual states. As an EU member, Britain wields far more power and authority to deal with trans-national players (e.g. corporations and their lobbyists, rebel groups, cross-border rogue states etc) and navigate these tides than if it stands alone.	con	No trade agreement exists that does not have an arbitrator that forces changes of laws in the participating countries. Even falling back to World Trade Organisation would mean other countries have effects on our laws.
no trade agreement exists that does not have an arbitrator that forces changes of laws in the participating countries. even falling back to world trade organisation would mean other countries have effects on our laws.	1_1.8.10.4.1.	No trade agreement exists that does not have an arbitrator that forces changes of laws in the participating countries. Even falling back to World Trade Organisation would mean other countries have effects on our laws.	con	MPs could hold the outcomes of the deal to account and have repealed it if it was unpopular. Within the EU, they cannot.
mps could hold the outcomes of the deal to account and have repealed it if it was unpopular. within the eu, they cannot.	1_1.8.10.4.1.1.	MPs could hold the outcomes of the deal to account and have repealed it if it was unpopular. Within the EU, they cannot.	pro	
even big corporations are bound by law, wether it be national or international, thus ways remain to limit their capacity for interference in national politics.	1_1.8.10.5.	Even big corporations are bound by law, wether it be national or international, thus ways remain to limit their capacity for interference in national politics.	pro	
the eu itself lacks transparency and is very much affected by lobbying from big corporations. it is not an exaggeration to say that there is even less control from the people in this instance than there would be were the national state the only institution to be considered, in the absence of the eu.	1_1.8.10.6.	The EU itself lacks transparency and is very much affected by lobbying from big corporations. It is not an exaggeration to say that there is even less control from the people in this instance than there would be were the national state the only institution to be considered, in the absence of the EU.	pro	
the uk leaving the eu harms the eu and wider europe.	1_1.9.	The UK leaving the EU harms the EU and wider Europe.	con	The harming of the EU will provide impetus for the EU to offer a better deal to encourage the UK to rejoin.	Brexit strengthens Eurosceptic parties throughout Europe (making other exit votes more likely), posing an existential threat to the EU.	The EU will feel a greater sense of cohesiveness without the UK holding it back on key issues.	The UK has no obligation to the EU, and should only do what is in its interests. The harms to the EU of Brexit are irrelevant.	A hard Brexit makes the expansion of the EU more challenging.	Brexit will harm the economies of EU countries.	Europe faces a world in turmoil. The UK will be weaker outside the EU. This is not the time for Brexit. This is the time to come together and stand up for Europe.
the harming of the eu will provide impetus for the eu to offer a better deal to encourage the uk to rejoin.	1_1.9.1.	The harming of the EU will provide impetus for the EU to offer a better deal to encourage the UK to rejoin.	pro	The UK hasn't left yet, so it can't rejoin. If the UK were to seek to rejoin after it left, it would likely mean having to sign up to schengen, euro and EU army, arguably a worse position than it currently enjoys.	The terms for the UK to rejoin the EU are likely to be worse than those it already has as a full member.
the uk hasn't left yet, so it can't rejoin. if the uk were to seek to rejoin after it left, it would likely mean having to sign up to schengen, euro and eu army, arguably a worse position than it currently enjoys.	1_1.9.1.1.	The UK hasn't left yet, so it can't rejoin. If the UK were to seek to rejoin after it left, it would likely mean having to sign up to schengen, euro and EU army, arguably a worse position than it currently enjoys.	con	
the terms for the uk to rejoin the eu are likely to be worse than those it already has as a full member.	1_1.9.1.2.	The terms for the UK to rejoin the EU are likely to be worse than those it already has as a full member.	con	
brexit strengthens eurosceptic parties throughout europe (making other exit votes more likely), posing an existential threat to the eu.	1_1.9.2.	Brexit strengthens Eurosceptic parties throughout Europe (making other exit votes more likely), posing an existential threat to the EU.	con	EU politicians fear the greater German dominance that will emerge without the UK's check on German will.	Approval of the EU has gone up amongst the citizens of Germany, Hungary, Sweden, the Netherlands, Spain, Italy and France since the referendum.	The UK's fall from the fastest growing member of the G7 to the slowest will serve as a warning to other countries as to the effect of leaving the EU.
eu politicians fear the greater german dominance that will emerge without the uk's check on german will.	1_1.9.2.1.	EU politicians fear the greater German dominance that will emerge without the UK's check on German will.	con	Poland saw Brexit as negative, largely because the UK acted as a counterweight to the eurozone countries (particularly Germany) and therefore aligned with its interests.
poland saw brexit as negative, largely because the uk acted as a counterweight to the eurozone countries (particularly germany) and therefore aligned with its interests.	1_1.9.2.1.1.	Poland saw Brexit as negative, largely because the UK acted as a counterweight to the eurozone countries (particularly Germany) and therefore aligned with its interests.	con	
approval of the eu has gone up amongst the citizens of germany, hungary, sweden, the netherlands, spain, italy and france since the referendum.	1_1.9.2.2.	Approval of the EU has gone up amongst the citizens of Germany, Hungary, Sweden, the Netherlands, Spain, Italy and France since the referendum.	pro	Even Italy's eurosceptic 5-Star Movement, which leads opinion polls ahead of the upcoming election, has abandoned its plans for a referendum on membership in the eurozone.	Brexit, as a symbol of a populist uprising agains the globalist order, has emboldened actors (such as Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán who, while not wanting to leave the EU, seek to undermine it.	Eurobarometer 88 (p. 15) confirms an improving overall image of the EU since the Brexit referendum in 2016.
even italy's eurosceptic 5-star movement, which leads opinion polls ahead of the upcoming election, has abandoned its plans for a referendum on membership in the eurozone.	1_1.9.2.2.1.	Even Italy's eurosceptic 5-Star Movement, which leads opinion polls ahead of the upcoming election, has abandoned its plans for a referendum on membership in the eurozone.	pro	
brexit, as a symbol of a populist uprising agains the globalist order, has emboldened actors (such as hungarian prime minister viktor orbán who, while not wanting to leave the eu, seek to undermine it.	1_1.9.2.2.2.	Brexit, as a symbol of a populist uprising agains the globalist order, has emboldened actors (such as Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán who, while not wanting to leave the EU, seek to undermine it.	con	Orbán is the democratically elected and extremely popular prime minister of Hungary and should not be glibly maligned.
orbán is the democratically elected and extremely popular prime minister of hungary and should not be glibly maligned.	1_1.9.2.2.2.1.	Orbán is the democratically elected and extremely popular prime minister of Hungary and should not be glibly maligned.	pro	
eurobarometer 88 (p. 15) confirms an improving overall image of the eu since the brexit referendum in 2016.	1_1.9.2.2.3.	Eurobarometer 88 (p. 15) confirms an improving overall image of the EU since the Brexit referendum in 2016.	pro	
the uk's fall from the fastest growing member of the g7 to the slowest will serve as a warning to other countries as to the effect of leaving the eu.	1_1.9.2.3.	The UK's fall from the fastest growing member of the G7 to the slowest will serve as a warning to other countries as to the effect of leaving the EU.	pro	The citizens of other countries aren’t stupid enough to look at short term economic blips but rather longer term trends.	This only applies if Brexit is extremely harmful for the UK economy in the long term, a point which is heavily contested.
the citizens of other countries aren’t stupid enough to look at short term economic blips but rather longer term trends.	1_1.9.2.3.1.	The citizens of other countries aren’t stupid enough to look at short term economic blips but rather longer term trends.	con	
this only applies if brexit is extremely harmful for the uk economy in the long term, a point which is heavily contested.	1_1.9.2.3.2.	This only applies if Brexit is extremely harmful for the UK economy in the long term, a point which is heavily contested.	con	The short term harm to the economy can also serve as a signal to the remaining members of the EU to not arrange for a referendum, especially as a short term economic hit would be attributed to the ruling party in question.
the short term harm to the economy can also serve as a signal to the remaining members of the eu to not arrange for a referendum, especially as a short term economic hit would be attributed to the ruling party in question.	1_1.9.2.3.2.1.	The short term harm to the economy can also serve as a signal to the remaining members of the EU to not arrange for a referendum, especially as a short term economic hit would be attributed to the ruling party in question.	pro	
the eu will feel a greater sense of cohesiveness without the uk holding it back on key issues.	1_1.9.3.	The EU will feel a greater sense of cohesiveness without the UK holding it back on key issues.	pro	Approval of the EU has gone up amongst the citizens of Germany, Hungary, Sweden, the Netherlands, Spain, Italy and France since the referendum.	EU's cohesion policy is in under threat due to economic and financial effects of Brexit. Budget consequences article. Report on cohesion policy challenges in the light of Brexit.	EU officials think greater integration will be possible without the UK's opposition.	Brexit, as a symbol of a populist uprising agains the globalist order, has emboldened actors (such as Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán who, while not wanting to leave the EU, seek to undermine it.
eu's cohesion policy is in under threat due to economic and financial effects of brexit. budget consequences article. report on cohesion policy challenges in the light of brexit.	1_1.9.3.2.	EU's cohesion policy is in under threat due to economic and financial effects of Brexit. Budget consequences article. Report on cohesion policy challenges in the light of Brexit.	con	
eu officials think greater integration will be possible without the uk's opposition.	1_1.9.3.3.	EU officials think greater integration will be possible without the UK's opposition.	pro	The UK's special EU Reform deal would have included exemption from the "Ever Closer Union" of the EU.
the uk's special eu reform deal would have included exemption from the "ever closer union" of the eu.	1_1.9.3.3.1.	The UK's special EU Reform deal would have included exemption from the "Ever Closer Union" of the EU.	pro	
the uk has no obligation to the eu, and should only do what is in its interests. the harms to the eu of brexit are irrelevant.	1_1.9.4.	The UK has no obligation to the EU, and should only do what is in its interests. The harms to the EU of Brexit are irrelevant.	pro	If the UK leaving the EU harms the lives of millions of people in Europe, this is a relevant factor in the decision at a moral level.	This debate is not inherently from the UK's perspective. It is unclear why we should not also factor in the benefit of hundreds of millions of people in Europe.	Whether within or outside of the EU the UK needs to take the interests of its closest allies (the EU member states) into account for its foreign policy. This is because they share many geopolitical interests which are less likely to be promoted with a weakened EU.	The harms to the EU can lead to economical, political or other crises which can spread beyond the EU borders.
if the uk leaving the eu harms the lives of millions of people in europe, this is a relevant factor in the decision at a moral level.	1_1.9.4.1.	If the UK leaving the EU harms the lives of millions of people in Europe, this is a relevant factor in the decision at a moral level.	con	Even in terms of national interest, acting immorally by harming the lives of European citizens also has a negative consequence of harming the UK's relations and public image.
even in terms of national interest, acting immorally by harming the lives of european citizens also has a negative consequence of harming the uk's relations and public image.	1_1.9.4.1.1.	Even in terms of national interest, acting immorally by harming the lives of European citizens also has a negative consequence of harming the UK's relations and public image.	con	
this debate is not inherently from the uk's perspective. it is unclear why we should not also factor in the benefit of hundreds of millions of people in europe.	1_1.9.4.2.	This debate is not inherently from the UK's perspective. It is unclear why we should not also factor in the benefit of hundreds of millions of people in Europe.	con	
whether within or outside of the eu the uk needs to take the interests of its closest allies (the eu member states) into account for its foreign policy. this is because they share many geopolitical interests which are less likely to be promoted with a weakened eu.	1_1.9.4.3.	Whether within or outside of the EU the UK needs to take the interests of its closest allies (the EU member states) into account for its foreign policy. This is because they share many geopolitical interests which are less likely to be promoted with a weakened EU.	con	
the harms to the eu can lead to economical, political or other crises which can spread beyond the eu borders.	1_1.9.4.4.	The harms to the EU can lead to economical, political or other crises which can spread beyond the EU borders.	con	
a hard brexit makes the expansion of the eu more challenging.	1_1.9.5.	A hard Brexit makes the expansion of the EU more challenging.	con	The UK has long been a vocal proponent of extending the bloc into ex-communist central and eastern Europe. Other donor states will become less willing and able to support this without the support and funding of the UK.	EU expansion is bad for Europe and bad for accession states.	Brexit makes states deciding to join the EU more uncertain about its future and thus less likely to join.
the uk has long been a vocal proponent of extending the bloc into ex-communist central and eastern europe. other donor states will become less willing and able to support this without the support and funding of the uk.	1_1.9.5.1.	The UK has long been a vocal proponent of extending the bloc into ex-communist central and eastern Europe. Other donor states will become less willing and able to support this without the support and funding of the UK.	con	Germany, not the UK, has taken the lead on many accession talks since 2014.
germany, not the uk, has taken the lead on many accession talks since 2014.	1_1.9.5.1.1.	Germany, not the UK, has taken the lead on many accession talks since 2014.	pro	
eu expansion is bad for europe and bad for accession states.	1_1.9.5.2.	EU expansion is bad for Europe and bad for accession states.	pro	Growth potential in accession states like Serbia and Ukraine is high. They could be strong trade partners for the EU (and the UK if they stay).	The influence of Russia in the Balkans and Ukraine is troublesome for the UK and the EU. Russia constitutes an attractive model of government for a number of regional leaders, who might seek to align their policies more with Russia and other non-EU actors. If these states are not brought into the EU fold they may fall back under the influence of Russia which is not in the UK or EU's interest geopolitically.	Prospects of EU accession have long been drivers of reforms preventing ethnic conflict and discrimination. Political analysts and diplomats worry that the loss of EU leverage in accession states could pose a security threat for entire European community.	As Greece demonstrated, some states in the EU cannot compete with the larger and more developed economies of Western Europe. This leads to loss of industry, jobs, and forces the countries to run government deficits to offset trade imbalances.	As we see with Hungary, some states have competing values to the EU and once added foment internal conflict and a crisis of common values.	New member states tend to put economic strains on the funds of the union as we have seen in the past. This not only puts economic strain on the union, but reduces the available structural funding for current EU recipients.	The EU is based on “freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights.” This is universal and does not just apply to original member states. Once they meet democratic and economic criteria, the EU has a moral obligation to let accession states in.	Adding new members to the EU like Ukraine and states in the Western Balkans gives it strength in numbers and increased leverage on a global stage as a bloc.
growth potential in accession states like serbia and ukraine is high. they could be strong trade partners for the eu (and the uk if they stay).	1_1.9.5.2.1.	Growth potential in accession states like Serbia and Ukraine is high. They could be strong trade partners for the EU (and the UK if they stay).	con	
the influence of russia in the balkans and ukraine is troublesome for the uk and the eu. russia constitutes an attractive model of government for a number of regional leaders, who might seek to align their policies more with russia and other non-eu actors. if these states are not brought into the eu fold they may fall back under the influence of russia which is not in the uk or eu's interest geopolitically.	1_1.9.5.2.2.	The influence of Russia in the Balkans and Ukraine is troublesome for the UK and the EU. Russia constitutes an attractive model of government for a number of regional leaders, who might seek to align their policies more with Russia and other non-EU actors. If these states are not brought into the EU fold they may fall back under the influence of Russia which is not in the UK or EU's interest geopolitically.	con	
prospects of eu accession have long been drivers of reforms preventing ethnic conflict and discrimination. political analysts and diplomats worry that the loss of eu leverage in accession states could pose a security threat for entire european community.	1_1.9.5.2.3.	Prospects of EU accession have long been drivers of reforms preventing ethnic conflict and discrimination. Political analysts and diplomats worry that the loss of EU leverage in accession states could pose a security threat for entire European community.	con	
as greece demonstrated, some states in the eu cannot compete with the larger and more developed economies of western europe. this leads to loss of industry, jobs, and forces the countries to run government deficits to offset trade imbalances.	1_1.9.5.2.4.	As Greece demonstrated, some states in the EU cannot compete with the larger and more developed economies of Western Europe. This leads to loss of industry, jobs, and forces the countries to run government deficits to offset trade imbalances.	pro	The ban on tariffs means countries cannot pursue protectionist economic policies to ensure domestic industries survive.
as we see with hungary, some states have competing values to the eu and once added foment internal conflict and a crisis of common values.	1_1.9.5.2.5.	As we see with Hungary, some states have competing values to the EU and once added foment internal conflict and a crisis of common values.	pro	-> See discussion #19119: Hungary should leave the European Union.	Member states must have strong democratic institutions in order to join the EU.	Poland and Hungary have been making increasingly illiberal and anti-democratic changes in their governance over recent years. It is unclear if the EU has the capacity to maintain democracy among its member states.	Turkey, run by what is considered to be an authoritarian regime by many, is one of the states that has been considered historically in accession debates. Its competing values upon admission would certainly call the EU's values into question.
-> see discussion #19119: hungary should leave the european union.	1_1.9.5.2.5.1.	-> See discussion #19119: Hungary should leave the European Union.	pro	
turkey, run by what is considered to be an authoritarian regime by many, is one of the states that has been considered historically in accession debates. its competing values upon admission would certainly call the eu's values into question.	1_1.9.5.2.5.4.	Turkey, run by what is considered to be an authoritarian regime by many, is one of the states that has been considered historically in accession debates. Its competing values upon admission would certainly call the EU's values into question.	pro	The EU is unlikely to admit Turkey under its current political situation with or without the UK. Moreover, the UK (while historically in favor of Turkey's accession) would probably be against it if it remains and would have veto power over its accession.
new member states tend to put economic strains on the funds of the union as we have seen in the past. this not only puts economic strain on the union, but reduces the available structural funding for current eu recipients.	1_1.9.5.2.6.	New member states tend to put economic strains on the funds of the union as we have seen in the past. This not only puts economic strain on the union, but reduces the available structural funding for current EU recipients.	pro	
the eu is based on “freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights.” this is universal and does not just apply to original member states. once they meet democratic and economic criteria, the eu has a moral obligation to let accession states in.	1_1.9.5.2.7.	The EU is based on “freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights.” This is universal and does not just apply to original member states. Once they meet democratic and economic criteria, the EU has a moral obligation to let accession states in.	con	
adding new members to the eu like ukraine and states in the western balkans gives it strength in numbers and increased leverage on a global stage as a bloc.	1_1.9.5.2.8.	Adding new members to the EU like Ukraine and states in the Western Balkans gives it strength in numbers and increased leverage on a global stage as a bloc.	con	
brexit makes states deciding to join the eu more uncertain about its future and thus less likely to join.	1_1.9.5.3.	Brexit makes states deciding to join the EU more uncertain about its future and thus less likely to join.	con	The accession process is likely to remain a foreign policy priority for all western Balkan countries because these states do not have a viable economic alternative.
the accession process is likely to remain a foreign policy priority for all western balkan countries because these states do not have a viable economic alternative.	1_1.9.5.3.1.	The accession process is likely to remain a foreign policy priority for all western Balkan countries because these states do not have a viable economic alternative.	pro	The influence of Russia in the Balkans and Ukraine is troublesome for the UK and the EU. Russia constitutes an attractive model of government for a number of regional leaders, who might seek to align their policies more with Russia and other non-EU actors. If these states are not brought into the EU fold they may fall back under the influence of Russia which is not in the UK or EU's interest geopolitically.
brexit will harm the economies of eu countries.	1_1.9.6.	Brexit will harm the economies of EU countries.	con	European countries will experience reduced trade volumes because of trade restrictions with the UK.	The loss of the UK's total contribution to the EU budget leaves a gap to fill of just over 5 percent.	A number of companies may relocate to other countries within the EU after the UK leaves.	The loss of jobs for migrant workers may harm the economies that currently export workers to the UK.	Poland is actively attempting to draw skilled young workers back from the UK to benefit the Polish economy.
european countries will experience reduced trade volumes because of trade restrictions with the uk.	1_1.9.6.1.	European countries will experience reduced trade volumes because of trade restrictions with the UK.	con	
the loss of the uk's total contribution to the eu budget leaves a gap to fill of just over 5 percent.	1_1.9.6.2.	The loss of the UK's total contribution to the EU budget leaves a gap to fill of just over 5 percent.	con	This will necessitate cuts in the budget, perhaps causing development funds for Western European nations to be scrapped.
this will necessitate cuts in the budget, perhaps causing development funds for western european nations to be scrapped.	1_1.9.6.2.1.	This will necessitate cuts in the budget, perhaps causing development funds for Western European nations to be scrapped.	con	
a number of companies may relocate to other countries within the eu after the uk leaves.	1_1.9.6.3.	A number of companies may relocate to other countries within the EU after the UK leaves.	pro	
the loss of jobs for migrant workers may harm the economies that currently export workers to the uk.	1_1.9.6.4.	The loss of jobs for migrant workers may harm the economies that currently export workers to the UK.	con	Migrants working in the UK sent £1.5 billion to £16.5 billion in Remittances to their home countries (in 2014).	Skilled migrant workers remaining in their home countries may in fact boost their economies.	Other EU developed EU economies, such as France and Germany, may benefit from an influx of workers who can no longer work in the UK.
migrants working in the uk sent £1.5 billion to £16.5 billion in remittances to their home countries (in 2014).	1_1.9.6.4.1.	Migrants working in the UK sent £1.5 billion to £16.5 billion in Remittances to their home countries (in 2014).	con	
skilled migrant workers remaining in their home countries may in fact boost their economies.	1_1.9.6.4.2.	Skilled migrant workers remaining in their home countries may in fact boost their economies.	pro	Poland is actively attempting to draw skilled young workers back from the UK to benefit the Polish economy.
poland is actively attempting to draw skilled young workers back from the uk to benefit the polish economy.	1_1.9.6.4.2.1.	Poland is actively attempting to draw skilled young workers back from the UK to benefit the Polish economy.	pro	Poland is the biggest beneficiary of EU funds, which are transforming the country. The UK leaving means there are less funds for countries like Poland.
poland is the biggest beneficiary of eu funds, which are transforming the country. the uk leaving means there are less funds for countries like poland.	1_1.9.6.4.2.1.1.	Poland is the biggest beneficiary of EU funds, which are transforming the country. The UK leaving means there are less funds for countries like Poland.	con	
other eu developed eu economies, such as france and germany, may benefit from an influx of workers who can no longer work in the uk.	1_1.9.6.4.3.	Other EU developed EU economies, such as France and Germany, may benefit from an influx of workers who can no longer work in the UK.	pro	
europe faces a world in turmoil. the uk will be weaker outside the eu. this is not the time for brexit. this is the time to come together and stand up for europe.	1_1.9.7.	Europe faces a world in turmoil. The UK will be weaker outside the EU. This is not the time for Brexit. This is the time to come together and stand up for Europe.	con	Russian mafia groups are reported to be operating in the EU on behalf of the Russian government.	Some criminal gangs in Russia may be more powerful than the government itself, and thus represent an even greater risk for the stability of Europe.	The political turmoil in the United States is destabilising the stock market in European countries.	The United States Trump government may be corrupt, which means it is perhaps a less useful and less reliable ally for Europe.
russian mafia groups are reported to be operating in the eu on behalf of the russian government.	1_1.9.7.1.	Russian mafia groups are reported to be operating in the EU on behalf of the Russian government.	con	
some criminal gangs in russia may be more powerful than the government itself, and thus represent an even greater risk for the stability of europe.	1_1.9.7.2.	Some criminal gangs in Russia may be more powerful than the government itself, and thus represent an even greater risk for the stability of Europe.	con	
the political turmoil in the united states is destabilising the stock market in european countries.	1_1.9.7.3.	The political turmoil in the United States is destabilising the stock market in European countries.	con	
the united states trump government may be corrupt, which means it is perhaps a less useful and less reliable ally for europe.	1_1.9.7.4.	The United States Trump government may be corrupt, which means it is perhaps a less useful and less reliable ally for Europe.	con	
the institutions of the eu are not representative of modern britain.	1_1.11.	The institutions of the EU are not representative of modern Britain.	pro	The bureaucratic and elected institutions of the EU demonstrate a distinct lack of ethnic diversity, particularly when UK-originating MEPs/employees are excluded. The UK should not be part of an institution which lacks diversity to this extent.	The EU has been a driver of equality policy in Europe.	The EU commissions senior management is 35% female, and 37% of middle management is female.	The European Council (made up of the leaders of the 28 EU member states) is just 10% female (UK, Germany, Lithuania), whereas the UK cabinet is much more progressive with 30% female members.
the bureaucratic and elected institutions of the eu demonstrate a distinct lack of ethnic diversity, particularly when uk-originating meps/employees are excluded. the uk should not be part of an institution which lacks diversity to this extent.	1_1.11.1.	The bureaucratic and elected institutions of the EU demonstrate a distinct lack of ethnic diversity, particularly when UK-originating MEPs/employees are excluded. The UK should not be part of an institution which lacks diversity to this extent.	pro	Currently only 5% of the MEPs are from ethnic minorities (despite these people making up 10% of the total population), and a fifth of these (around 7 MEPs) are from the UK.	Six out of the seven different 'Presidents' of the EU are all white and male.	The EU has been accused of being blind to ethnic minorities.	This is a global problem that is not unique to these institutions, and therefore not a reason to leave the EU.	The best way to influence change in the organisation is by being a member.	MEP selection is made by the party being voted for by the electorate as elections are conducted using the proportional representation system. This means if someone votes for Labour, for example, the Labour Party allocates the candidate. Lack of diversity is therefore down to who the parties put up, rather than the EU as an organisation.	Ethnic diversity doesn't just include different skin colours. There are at least 28 (but undoubtedly more) different ethnicities in the Commission and Parliament.	Positive Discrimination Targets as inherently demanded in the question are in general not a healthy way to target discrimination - as they are necessarily discriminatory themselves. Equality of opportunity, not of outcome, should be the goal. This is the path to a meritocracy.	8% of MPs are from ethnic minority backgrounds, compared to 13% of the general population. The UK itself lacks diversity in representation.
currently only 5% of the meps are from ethnic minorities (despite these people making up 10% of the total population), and a fifth of these (around 7 meps) are from the uk.	1_1.11.1.1.	Currently only 5% of the MEPs are from ethnic minorities (despite these people making up 10% of the total population), and a fifth of these (around 7 MEPs) are from the UK.	pro	In the last European parliament only 1.6% of MEPs were from ethnic minorities. Now it's 5%. That's a 312% improvement in representation in one election cycle.
in the last european parliament only 1.6% of meps were from ethnic minorities. now it's 5%. that's a 312% improvement in representation in one election cycle.	1_1.11.1.1.1.	In the last European parliament only 1.6% of MEPs were from ethnic minorities. Now it's 5%. That's a 312% improvement in representation in one election cycle.	con	
six out of the seven different 'presidents' of the eu are all white and male.	1_1.11.1.2.	Six out of the seven different 'Presidents' of the EU are all white and male.	pro	This is not an EU issue, the EU is relatively young, compare the EU to other diplomatic organisations. Britain has had no prime ministers of colour and only two women in it's history.
this is not an eu issue, the eu is relatively young, compare the eu to other diplomatic organisations. britain has had no prime ministers of colour and only two women in it's history.	1_1.11.1.2.1.	This is not an EU issue, the EU is relatively young, compare the EU to other diplomatic organisations. Britain has had no prime ministers of colour and only two women in it's history.	con	The UK has only had 2 (out of 75) female prime ministers since 1721. (Margaret Thatcher, Theresa May).	The UK has only had white prime ministers.	Over the last 40 years, the UK has had a female prime minister for 13 of those years, which is over 30% of the time. The EU has had female Presidents for zero of those years.
the uk has only had 2 (out of 75) female prime ministers since 1721. (margaret thatcher, theresa may).	1_1.11.1.2.1.1.	The UK has only had 2 (out of 75) female prime ministers since 1721. (Margaret Thatcher, Theresa May).	con	Over the last 40 years, the UK has had a female prime minister for 13 of those years, which is over 30% of the time. The EU has had female Presidents for zero of those years.	The UK has had a series of incredibly well respected and powerful queens who ruled as head of state since 1558.
over the last 40 years, the uk has had a female prime minister for 13 of those years, which is over 30% of the time. the eu has had female presidents for zero of those years.	1_1.11.1.2.1.1.1.	Over the last 40 years, the UK has had a female prime minister for 13 of those years, which is over 30% of the time. The EU has had female Presidents for zero of those years.	pro	
the uk has had a series of incredibly well respected and powerful queens who ruled as head of state since 1558.	1_1.11.1.2.1.1.2.	The UK has had a series of incredibly well respected and powerful queens who ruled as head of state since 1558.	pro	
the uk has only had white prime ministers.	1_1.11.1.2.1.2.	The UK has only had white prime ministers.	con	The UK had its first ethnic minority Prime Minister and first person from an ethnic minority background to hold one of the Great Offices of State in 1868.
the uk had its first ethnic minority prime minister and first person from an ethnic minority background to hold one of the great offices of state in 1868.	1_1.11.1.2.1.2.1.	The UK had its first ethnic minority Prime Minister and first person from an ethnic minority background to hold one of the Great Offices of State in 1868.	pro	
the eu has been accused of being blind to ethnic minorities.	1_1.11.1.3.	The EU has been accused of being blind to ethnic minorities.	pro	
this is a global problem that is not unique to these institutions, and therefore not a reason to leave the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.	This is a global problem that is not unique to these institutions, and therefore not a reason to leave the EU.	con	The EU bureaucracy is a particularly bad example, which is paying lip service to the problem while continuing in the same worrying vein favouring white men over woman and ethnic minorities for positions of real power.  As the unelected bureaucratic body which in some respects wields more power than the UK parliament,  we should not accept its power until it has genuinely reformed.	In the UK, 32% of MPs are women, whereas in the EU 37.4% of MEPs are women.	The UKs unadjusted Gender pay gap is 21%.	Gender inequality is a global problem, as measured by the UNDPs Gender Inequality Index.
the eu bureaucracy is a particularly bad example, which is paying lip service to the problem while continuing in the same worrying vein favouring white men over woman and ethnic minorities for positions of real power.  as the unelected bureaucratic body which in some respects wields more power than the uk parliament,  we should not accept its power until it has genuinely reformed.	1_1.11.1.4.1.	The EU bureaucracy is a particularly bad example, which is paying lip service to the problem while continuing in the same worrying vein favouring white men over woman and ethnic minorities for positions of real power.  As the unelected bureaucratic body which in some respects wields more power than the UK parliament,  we should not accept its power until it has genuinely reformed.	pro	Currently only 5% of the MEPs are from ethnic minorities (despite these people making up 10% of the total population), and a fifth of these (around 7 MEPs) are from the UK.	Six out of the seven different 'Presidents' of the EU are all white and male.	The EU has been accused of being blind to ethnic minorities.	The best way to influence change in the organisation is by being a member.
the best way to influence change in the organisation is by being a member.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.	The best way to influence change in the organisation is by being a member.	con	David Cameron already tried proposing changes and failed to extract meaningful concessions.	The European commission is unelected and have been active since 2007. We may elect our MEPs but the main policy makers are still unelected and while they are accountable to the European parliament who can censure their decisions it is by no means a perfect system as it falls to the foibles of international politics.	Britain will have significantly less influence in Europe if it leaves the EU, and as a result will be a weaker nation in the international community.
david cameron already tried proposing changes and failed to extract meaningful concessions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.1.	David Cameron already tried proposing changes and failed to extract meaningful concessions.	pro	Mr Cameron secured the “emergency brake/Red Card” mechanism which allowed any EU country whose welfare system has come under strain, as the result of an influx of EU migrants of ‘an exceptional magnitude’, to restrict access to certain kinds of welfare benefits.	It was recognised that the United Kingdom was exempt to further political integration into the European Union.
mr cameron secured the “emergency brake/red card” mechanism which allowed any eu country whose welfare system has come under strain, as the result of an influx of eu migrants of ‘an exceptional magnitude’, to restrict access to certain kinds of welfare benefits.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.1.1.	Mr Cameron secured the “emergency brake/Red Card” mechanism which allowed any EU country whose welfare system has come under strain, as the result of an influx of EU migrants of ‘an exceptional magnitude’, to restrict access to certain kinds of welfare benefits.	con	
it was recognised that the united kingdom was exempt to further political integration into the european union.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.1.2.	It was recognised that the United Kingdom was exempt to further political integration into the European Union.	con	
britain will have significantly less influence in europe if it leaves the eu, and as a result will be a weaker nation in the international community.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.	Britain will have significantly less influence in Europe if it leaves the EU, and as a result will be a weaker nation in the international community.	con	Influence is complex and multifactorial, and therefore challenging to predict. The view that the UK's post-Brexit future influence will wane may therefore reflect cognitive bias.	The UK owns a market composed of 65 million people; the USA owns a market composed of 300 million people; the EU owns a market composed of 500 million people; China owns a market composed of 1 billion people: the larger your market is, the more powerful you are. Outside the EU, the UK will lose its bargaining power.	Britain's soft-power and diplomatic relations with the Commonwealth, the Anglosphere and many other nations outside the EU make it if not the pre-eminent global soft-power, then a close second or third.	Leaving the EU would mean the UK probably could not go back if Brexit was a total disaster. Remaining would mean the UK could still leave if membership proved to get worse in the future. The best option is to stay and use veto to agitate for change and improve the EU as a full, key member.	The UK's negotiating position in the EU will likely be extremely poor. Cancellation of Article 50 will not make everyone forget about the whole affair.	The UK will have less value to the US as it will no longer be its window to the European Union.	Britain's foreign policy focus on Europe crowds out its ability to pursue partnerships with the commonwealth.	In the event of a hard Brexit, Britain will overnight be excluded from EU arrangements with “third countries”, or non-EU countries, entering the equivalent of a legal void in key parts of its external commercial relations. This exclusion will mean that the UK will have to renegotiate 759 treaties.	A hard Brexit will adversely affect the interests of countries outside of Europe, leading to a fall in Britain's standing within the international community.	Having a large say in the EU has allowed the UK to shape the policy interests of a larger and more powerful entity, giving Britain more influence on the international stage. Withdrawing from this position would likely reverse these effects, reducing British influence.	The EU has shaped British foreign policy more than Britain has shaped European foreign policy. Speaking with an independent voice will give the UK the ability to lead by example and forge new partnerships rather than continually compromise with other EU countries.	Britain is still in NATO, giving it many forums and connections for security policy coordination.	Remaining in the EU would harm our democracy and humiliate the UK on the world stage.	If Britain wants to trade with the EU, it will still be forced to follow EU trade regulations, but without any input on what those regulations are.
influence is complex and multifactorial, and therefore challenging to predict. the view that the uk's post-brexit future influence will wane may therefore reflect cognitive bias.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.	Influence is complex and multifactorial, and therefore challenging to predict. The view that the UK's post-Brexit future influence will wane may therefore reflect cognitive bias.	pro	Given the size of the UK economy, the EU may be forced to respond to unilateral decisions taken by the UK.	Agreements reached between the UK and other countries may directly influence EU policy.	As a member of the EU the UK has a veto in many important areas of policy, and a vote in many more. It's nonsensical to suggest that losing veto power can add influence.	Many things are complex and multifactorial and challenging to predict. This doesn't mean you can't take a measured view on them. It seems highly likely that wielding less economic power post-Brexit will result in wielding less influence.
given the size of the uk economy, the eu may be forced to respond to unilateral decisions taken by the uk.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.1.	Given the size of the UK economy, the EU may be forced to respond to unilateral decisions taken by the UK.	pro	The EU has threatened to sanction the UK if it liberalises its economy post-Brexit, illustrating they fear the power and influence the UK will have post-Brexit.	Unshackled by the EU's protectionist rules, the UK could lead by example with economic and trade liberalisation, providing a beacon to economic growth that the EU could follow should they wish to replicate our success.
the eu has threatened to sanction the uk if it liberalises its economy post-brexit, illustrating they fear the power and influence the uk will have post-brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.1.1.	The EU has threatened to sanction the UK if it liberalises its economy post-Brexit, illustrating they fear the power and influence the UK will have post-Brexit.	pro	The idea to treat a country that aims to become "an uncooperative tax haven" as "an uncooperative tax jurisdiction" seems a pragmatic, rather than fearful, response.
the idea to treat a country that aims to become "an uncooperative tax haven" as "an uncooperative tax jurisdiction" seems a pragmatic, rather than fearful, response.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.1.1.1.	The idea to treat a country that aims to become "an uncooperative tax haven" as "an uncooperative tax jurisdiction" seems a pragmatic, rather than fearful, response.	con	
unshackled by the eu's protectionist rules, the uk could lead by example with economic and trade liberalisation, providing a beacon to economic growth that the eu could follow should they wish to replicate our success.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.1.2.	Unshackled by the EU's protectionist rules, the UK could lead by example with economic and trade liberalisation, providing a beacon to economic growth that the EU could follow should they wish to replicate our success.	pro	The European Union is one of the most open economies in the world and is committed to free trade.	A hard Brexit will significantly damage the UK economy.
agreements reached between the uk and other countries may directly influence eu policy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.2.	Agreements reached between the UK and other countries may directly influence EU policy.	pro	
as a member of the eu the uk has a veto in many important areas of policy, and a vote in many more. it's nonsensical to suggest that losing veto power can add influence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.3.	As a member of the EU the UK has a veto in many important areas of policy, and a vote in many more. It's nonsensical to suggest that losing veto power can add influence.	con	
many things are complex and multifactorial and challenging to predict. this doesn't mean you can't take a measured view on them. it seems highly likely that wielding less economic power post-brexit will result in wielding less influence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.1.4.	Many things are complex and multifactorial and challenging to predict. This doesn't mean you can't take a measured view on them. It seems highly likely that wielding less economic power post-Brexit will result in wielding less influence.	con	
the uk owns a market composed of 65 million people; the usa owns a market composed of 300 million people; the eu owns a market composed of 500 million people; china owns a market composed of 1 billion people: the larger your market is, the more powerful you are. outside the eu, the uk will lose its bargaining power.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.	The UK owns a market composed of 65 million people; the USA owns a market composed of 300 million people; the EU owns a market composed of 500 million people; China owns a market composed of 1 billion people: the larger your market is, the more powerful you are. Outside the EU, the UK will lose its bargaining power.	con	Economy size is only one metric of how much other countries want to trade with you. The other important metric is ease of doing business.  The UK together with the US are the only G7 countries that make the top 10 list, indicating how desirable the UK economy is and how much other countries will want to do business with us. Germany only ranks 20th, France 31st and Italy 46th. The UK is both very big and a very easy place to do business.	Value and currency strength are also relevant to an assessment of a market. So one million UK citizens are worth far more than one million Chinese citizens in market terms.
economy size is only one metric of how much other countries want to trade with you. the other important metric is ease of doing business.  the uk together with the us are the only g7 countries that make the top 10 list, indicating how desirable the uk economy is and how much other countries will want to do business with us. germany only ranks 20th, france 31st and italy 46th. the uk is both very big and a very easy place to do business.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.1.	Economy size is only one metric of how much other countries want to trade with you. The other important metric is ease of doing business.  The UK together with the US are the only G7 countries that make the top 10 list, indicating how desirable the UK economy is and how much other countries will want to do business with us. Germany only ranks 20th, France 31st and Italy 46th. The UK is both very big and a very easy place to do business.	pro	Of course it is, but think about losing all the facilities that the EU offers to the UK (for example, two european agencies, and also think about all the cuts prepared by the English government. We can't be sure the UK will keep being a good place to do business.	One of the main reasons to trade with Europe (rather than other countries) is distance. Distance equates to fuel and time. Increase either and cost increases, while fuel also increases our carbon footprint.	The UK already does business with plenty of other countries under the existing EU arrangements. It is not clear that the desirablity of the UK for external trade will increase as a result of Brexit.
of course it is, but think about losing all the facilities that the eu offers to the uk (for example, two european agencies, and also think about all the cuts prepared by the english government. we can't be sure the uk will keep being a good place to do business.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.1.1.	Of course it is, but think about losing all the facilities that the EU offers to the UK (for example, two european agencies, and also think about all the cuts prepared by the English government. We can't be sure the UK will keep being a good place to do business.	con	It is the UK and not the EU that has made the UK a good place to do business, therefore fear mongering about what a future UK government may do outside of the EU is misguided.
it is the uk and not the eu that has made the uk a good place to do business, therefore fear mongering about what a future uk government may do outside of the eu is misguided.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.1.1.1.	It is the UK and not the EU that has made the UK a good place to do business, therefore fear mongering about what a future UK government may do outside of the EU is misguided.	pro	Brexit is making the UK a less good place to do business.
brexit is making the uk a less good place to do business.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.1.1.1.1.	Brexit is making the UK a less good place to do business.	con	
the uk already does business with plenty of other countries under the existing eu arrangements. it is not clear that the desirablity of the uk for external trade will increase as a result of brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.1.3.	The UK already does business with plenty of other countries under the existing EU arrangements. It is not clear that the desirablity of the UK for external trade will increase as a result of Brexit.	con	
value and currency strength are also relevant to an assessment of a market. so one million uk citizens are worth far more than one million chinese citizens in market terms.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.2.2.	Value and currency strength are also relevant to an assessment of a market. So one million UK citizens are worth far more than one million Chinese citizens in market terms.	pro	
britain's soft-power and diplomatic relations with the commonwealth, the anglosphere and many other nations outside the eu make it if not the pre-eminent global soft-power, then a close second or third.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.	Britain's soft-power and diplomatic relations with the Commonwealth, the Anglosphere and many other nations outside the EU make it if not the pre-eminent global soft-power, then a close second or third.	pro	A report by Portland, a communications strategy firm working for governments and large corporations, currently ranks the UK as the nation with the most soft power in the world. This makes the UK well placed to weather the transition, and suggests a hard Brexit would not meaningfully affect its influence.	The Commonwealth has been shown to be an extremely weak institution, thus it does not grant the UK much 'softpower'.	The Anglosphere is currently pursuing a diverse range of political directions and agendas. It is unlikely that the UK can significantly direct individual countries, let alone the group as a whole.
a report by portland, a communications strategy firm working for governments and large corporations, currently ranks the uk as the nation with the most soft power in the world. this makes the uk well placed to weather the transition, and suggests a hard brexit would not meaningfully affect its influence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.1.	A report by Portland, a communications strategy firm working for governments and large corporations, currently ranks the UK as the nation with the most soft power in the world. This makes the UK well placed to weather the transition, and suggests a hard Brexit would not meaningfully affect its influence.	pro	
the commonwealth has been shown to be an extremely weak institution, thus it does not grant the uk much 'softpower'.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.2.	The Commonwealth has been shown to be an extremely weak institution, thus it does not grant the UK much 'softpower'.	con	The Commonwealth Charter aims to stop discrimination of all kinds, however Homosexuality remains a criminal offence in 35 of 53 Commonwealth states.	Several Commonwealth and former Commonwealth members have broken the Harare Declaration, despite the Commonwealth's objections. \1\]	The commonwealth is comprised of 52 member states, none of which have any greater decision-making power than the other. This hinders Britain's ability to impose its political will on those nations.
the commonwealth charter aims to stop discrimination of all kinds, however homosexuality remains a criminal offence in 35 of 53 commonwealth states.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.2.1.	The Commonwealth Charter aims to stop discrimination of all kinds, however Homosexuality remains a criminal offence in 35 of 53 Commonwealth states.	con	
several commonwealth and former commonwealth members have broken the harare declaration, despite the commonwealth's objections. \1\]	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.2.2.	Several Commonwealth and former Commonwealth members have broken the Harare Declaration, despite the Commonwealth's objections. \1\]	con	
the commonwealth is comprised of 52 member states, none of which have any greater decision-making power than the other. this hinders britain's ability to impose its political will on those nations.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.2.3.	The commonwealth is comprised of 52 member states, none of which have any greater decision-making power than the other. This hinders Britain's ability to impose its political will on those nations.	con	
the anglosphere is currently pursuing a diverse range of political directions and agendas. it is unlikely that the uk can significantly direct individual countries, let alone the group as a whole.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.3.3.	The Anglosphere is currently pursuing a diverse range of political directions and agendas. It is unlikely that the UK can significantly direct individual countries, let alone the group as a whole.	con	
leaving the eu would mean the uk probably could not go back if brexit was a total disaster. remaining would mean the uk could still leave if membership proved to get worse in the future. the best option is to stay and use veto to agitate for change and improve the eu as a full, key member.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.4.	Leaving the EU would mean the UK probably could not go back if Brexit was a total disaster. Remaining would mean the UK could still leave if membership proved to get worse in the future. The best option is to stay and use veto to agitate for change and improve the EU as a full, key member.	con	
the uk's negotiating position in the eu will likely be extremely poor. cancellation of article 50 will not make everyone forget about the whole affair.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.5.	The UK's negotiating position in the EU will likely be extremely poor. Cancellation of Article 50 will not make everyone forget about the whole affair.	pro	
the uk will have less value to the us as it will no longer be its window to the european union.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.6.	The UK will have less value to the US as it will no longer be its window to the European Union.	con	
britain's foreign policy focus on europe crowds out its ability to pursue partnerships with the commonwealth.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.	Britain's foreign policy focus on Europe crowds out its ability to pursue partnerships with the commonwealth.	pro	The commonwealth is a far less politically influential actor to be allied with than the EU.	The commonwealth is currently far less unified than the EU, making joint decisions on foreign policy far more difficult.	The UK already holds significant political influence with commonwealth states.	The combined population of the commonwealth is larger than that of the EU.	The EU is also looking at partnerships with India.	In the status quo, Britain acts as a voice for the Commonwealth countries' interests within the EU. Commonwealth states in the African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group (ACP) benefit particularly from this arrangement, which has led to beneficial trade deals with the EU as a whole based on their historic association with Britain. Brexit robs these countries of their primary advocate in the bloc.	The Caribbean nations depend heavily on tariff-free trade with Britain under the Economic Partnership Agreement. A hard Brexit would leave little time to renegotiate this, harming British-Caribbean relations.
the commonwealth is a far less politically influential actor to be allied with than the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.1.	The commonwealth is a far less politically influential actor to be allied with than the EU.	con	The combined GDP of the Commonwealth is only $10,923 billion, compared to the EU's GDP of $18,800 billion. The latter is clearly the far stronger power.	The commonwealth as a group is not, but individual countries in it are — Australia, Canada, India, South Africa, etc.
the combined gdp of the commonwealth is only $10,923 billion, compared to the eu's gdp of $18,800 billion. the latter is clearly the far stronger power.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.1.1.	The combined GDP of the Commonwealth is only $10,923 billion, compared to the EU's GDP of $18,800 billion. The latter is clearly the far stronger power.	con	
the commonwealth as a group is not, but individual countries in it are — australia, canada, india, south africa, etc.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.1.2.	The commonwealth as a group is not, but individual countries in it are — Australia, Canada, India, South Africa, etc.	pro	
the commonwealth is currently far less unified than the eu, making joint decisions on foreign policy far more difficult.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.2.	The commonwealth is currently far less unified than the EU, making joint decisions on foreign policy far more difficult.	con	The commonwealth is comprised of 52 member states, none of which have any greater decision-making power than the other. This hinders Britain's ability to impose its political will on those nations.	Because it’s not the same goal. Precisely what is criticized in the EU is the amount of control and influence it has on national politics.
because it’s not the same goal. precisely what is criticized in the eu is the amount of control and influence it has on national politics.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.2.2.	Because it’s not the same goal. Precisely what is criticized in the EU is the amount of control and influence it has on national politics.	pro	
the uk already holds significant political influence with commonwealth states.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.3.	The UK already holds significant political influence with commonwealth states.	con	The UK has come under criticism by Commonwealth nations in recent years due to its imperialist legacy, with prominent political parties in South Africa boycotting Commonwealth conferences and traditions such as the Commonwealth games coming under attack. The political atmosphere makes future cooperation more difficult.	The commonwealth's headquarters are in London.	Of the commonwealth member states, Britain provides the most funds.
the uk has come under criticism by commonwealth nations in recent years due to its imperialist legacy, with prominent political parties in south africa boycotting commonwealth conferences and traditions such as the commonwealth games coming under attack. the political atmosphere makes future cooperation more difficult.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.3.1.	The UK has come under criticism by Commonwealth nations in recent years due to its imperialist legacy, with prominent political parties in South Africa boycotting Commonwealth conferences and traditions such as the Commonwealth games coming under attack. The political atmosphere makes future cooperation more difficult.	pro	
the commonwealth's headquarters are in london.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.3.2.	The commonwealth's headquarters are in London.	con	
of the commonwealth member states, britain provides the most funds.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.3.3.	Of the commonwealth member states, Britain provides the most funds.	con	
the combined population of the commonwealth is larger than that of the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.4.	The combined population of the commonwealth is larger than that of the EU.	pro	The combined GDP of the Commonwealth is only $10,923 billion, compared to the EU's GDP of $18,800 billion. The latter is clearly the far stronger power.
in the status quo, britain acts as a voice for the commonwealth countries' interests within the eu. commonwealth states in the african, caribbean, and pacific group (acp) benefit particularly from this arrangement, which has led to beneficial trade deals with the eu as a whole based on their historic association with britain. brexit robs these countries of their primary advocate in the bloc.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.6.	In the status quo, Britain acts as a voice for the Commonwealth countries' interests within the EU. Commonwealth states in the African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group (ACP) benefit particularly from this arrangement, which has led to beneficial trade deals with the EU as a whole based on their historic association with Britain. Brexit robs these countries of their primary advocate in the bloc.	con	
the caribbean nations depend heavily on tariff-free trade with britain under the economic partnership agreement. a hard brexit would leave little time to renegotiate this, harming british-caribbean relations.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.7.	The Caribbean nations depend heavily on tariff-free trade with Britain under the Economic Partnership Agreement. A hard Brexit would leave little time to renegotiate this, harming British-Caribbean relations.	con	If it's an agreement already in place with the EU then they have the opportunity to agree it continues as it currently exists with the UK on a bilateral basis until something new is negotiated.
if it's an agreement already in place with the eu then they have the opportunity to agree it continues as it currently exists with the uk on a bilateral basis until something new is negotiated.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.7.7.1.	If it's an agreement already in place with the EU then they have the opportunity to agree it continues as it currently exists with the UK on a bilateral basis until something new is negotiated.	pro	
a hard brexit will adversely affect the interests of countries outside of europe, leading to a fall in britain's standing within the international community.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.9.	A hard Brexit will adversely affect the interests of countries outside of Europe, leading to a fall in Britain's standing within the international community.	con	The possibility of a hard Brexit has already thrown a trade deal with African states into question, adversely affecting Kenya's flower exports to the EU, a major part of its economy.	The Caribbean nations depend heavily on tariff-free trade with Britain under the Economic Partnership Agreement. A hard Brexit would leave little time to renegotiate this, harming British-Caribbean relations.
the possibility of a hard brexit has already thrown a trade deal with african states into question, adversely affecting kenya's flower exports to the eu, a major part of its economy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.9.1.	The possibility of a hard Brexit has already thrown a trade deal with African states into question, adversely affecting Kenya's flower exports to the EU, a major part of its economy.	con	
having a large say in the eu has allowed the uk to shape the policy interests of a larger and more powerful entity, giving britain more influence on the international stage. withdrawing from this position would likely reverse these effects, reducing british influence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.	Having a large say in the EU has allowed the UK to shape the policy interests of a larger and more powerful entity, giving Britain more influence on the international stage. Withdrawing from this position would likely reverse these effects, reducing British influence.	con	The UKs influence is derived as much from our global 'soft power' and alliance with the United States as anything else. The UK's ability to project hard power comes from its status as a nuclear power. The UK's status as a 'bridge' between the US and EU is much overhyped - witness the recent trade dispute of which the UK is merely a bystander. Freed from the EU, the UK can critique the EUs tendency to exploit its trade power with the global south.	Baroness Ashton, a British Labour peer, was the first High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, the most senior foreign affairs official in the EU following the Treaty of Lisbon.	Not having a say within the EU could reduce the UK's leverage with Washington. The US currently sees the UK as a bridge between themselves and continental Europe.	While within the EU, Britain has sizable representation in the European parliament (73 seats, as well as throughout all EU institutions.	EU membership has enabled Britain to pursue critical foreign policy objectives as part of a more formidable bloc, such as confronting Russia over its actions in Ukraine or addressing the Iran nuclear program.
the uks influence is derived as much from our global 'soft power' and alliance with the united states as anything else. the uk's ability to project hard power comes from its status as a nuclear power. the uk's status as a 'bridge' between the us and eu is much overhyped - witness the recent trade dispute of which the uk is merely a bystander. freed from the eu, the uk can critique the eus tendency to exploit its trade power with the global south.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.1.	The UKs influence is derived as much from our global 'soft power' and alliance with the United States as anything else. The UK's ability to project hard power comes from its status as a nuclear power. The UK's status as a 'bridge' between the US and EU is much overhyped - witness the recent trade dispute of which the UK is merely a bystander. Freed from the EU, the UK can critique the EUs tendency to exploit its trade power with the global south.	pro	
baroness ashton, a british labour peer, was the first high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy, the most senior foreign affairs official in the eu following the treaty of lisbon.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.2.	Baroness Ashton, a British Labour peer, was the first High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, the most senior foreign affairs official in the EU following the Treaty of Lisbon.	con	
not having a say within the eu could reduce the uk's leverage with washington. the us currently sees the uk as a bridge between themselves and continental europe.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.3.	Not having a say within the EU could reduce the UK's leverage with Washington. The US currently sees the UK as a bridge between themselves and continental Europe.	con	
while within the eu, britain has sizable representation in the european parliament (73 seats, as well as throughout all eu institutions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.4.	While within the EU, Britain has sizable representation in the European parliament (73 seats, as well as throughout all EU institutions.	con	
eu membership has enabled britain to pursue critical foreign policy objectives as part of a more formidable bloc, such as confronting russia over its actions in ukraine or addressing the iran nuclear program.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.5.	EU membership has enabled Britain to pursue critical foreign policy objectives as part of a more formidable bloc, such as confronting Russia over its actions in Ukraine or addressing the Iran nuclear program.	con	Britain has been the most vocal supporter within the EU of sanctions against Russia, according to Moscow's mayor Sergei Sobyanin.
britain has been the most vocal supporter within the eu of sanctions against russia, according to moscow's mayor sergei sobyanin.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.10.5.1.	Britain has been the most vocal supporter within the EU of sanctions against Russia, according to Moscow's mayor Sergei Sobyanin.	con	
the eu has shaped british foreign policy more than britain has shaped european foreign policy. speaking with an independent voice will give the uk the ability to lead by example and forge new partnerships rather than continually compromise with other eu countries.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.11.	The EU has shaped British foreign policy more than Britain has shaped European foreign policy. Speaking with an independent voice will give the UK the ability to lead by example and forge new partnerships rather than continually compromise with other EU countries.	pro	The Common Foreign and Security Policy is the organised foreign policy of the EU. Decisions require unanimity in the European Council, however once agreed aspects of the policy can be decided by qualified majority voting which ultimately means that Britain does not exercise complete control over its foreign policy.	Due to its large population and dominating economy, Germany has had major influence over the vast majority of EU policies, much to the dissatisfaction of other member states.	As a member of the EU, Britain has always tried to adopt a foreign policy that would ensure a balance of power in continental Europe.
the common foreign and security policy is the organised foreign policy of the eu. decisions require unanimity in the european council, however once agreed aspects of the policy can be decided by qualified majority voting which ultimately means that britain does not exercise complete control over its foreign policy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.11.1.	The Common Foreign and Security Policy is the organised foreign policy of the EU. Decisions require unanimity in the European Council, however once agreed aspects of the policy can be decided by qualified majority voting which ultimately means that Britain does not exercise complete control over its foreign policy.	pro	
as a member of the eu, britain has always tried to adopt a foreign policy that would ensure a balance of power in continental europe.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.11.3.	As a member of the EU, Britain has always tried to adopt a foreign policy that would ensure a balance of power in continental Europe.	con	
britain is still in nato, giving it many forums and connections for security policy coordination.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.12.	Britain is still in NATO, giving it many forums and connections for security policy coordination.	pro	As a result of Brexit, the UK is at risk of losing its most senior held position in NATO.	Because Brexit means that the UK will no longer have to support EU military endeavors, they will have more martial resources to deploy in the service of NATO. This additional support ensures that Britain remains able to access NATO resources and maintain its standing outside the EU.	The Trump Administration has consistently expressed doubts about the future of the alliance, making it an unreliable plan for British security moving forward.
as a result of brexit, the uk is at risk of losing its most senior held position in nato.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.12.1.	As a result of Brexit, the UK is at risk of losing its most senior held position in NATO.	con	
because brexit means that the uk will no longer have to support eu military endeavors, they will have more martial resources to deploy in the service of nato. this additional support ensures that britain remains able to access nato resources and maintain its standing outside the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.12.2.	Because Brexit means that the UK will no longer have to support EU military endeavors, they will have more martial resources to deploy in the service of NATO. This additional support ensures that Britain remains able to access NATO resources and maintain its standing outside the EU.	pro	More martial resources for NATO comes at the expense of the EU's defence, making this a zero sum game. Other EU countries may have to redirect efforts away from NATO to shore up holes left by the British.
more martial resources for nato comes at the expense of the eu's defence, making this a zero sum game. other eu countries may have to redirect efforts away from nato to shore up holes left by the british.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.12.2.1.	More martial resources for NATO comes at the expense of the EU's defence, making this a zero sum game. Other EU countries may have to redirect efforts away from NATO to shore up holes left by the British.	con	
the trump administration has consistently expressed doubts about the future of the alliance, making it an unreliable plan for british security moving forward.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.12.3.	The Trump Administration has consistently expressed doubts about the future of the alliance, making it an unreliable plan for British security moving forward.	con	Despite recent rhetorical grandstanding, the United States has taken concrete steps to continue to support the alliance.
despite recent rhetorical grandstanding, the united states has taken concrete steps to continue to support the alliance.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.12.3.1.	Despite recent rhetorical grandstanding, the United States has taken concrete steps to continue to support the alliance.	pro	
remaining in the eu would harm our democracy and humiliate the uk on the world stage.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.	Remaining in the EU would harm our democracy and humiliate the UK on the world stage.	pro	Remaining could correspond to the democratic will (expressed through a vote, through parliament, …)	Leaving in a way which is harmful to the UK may do even more damage to the UK's reputation.	Both remaining or leaving might harm democracy, and the UK is already humiliated by an incompetent negotiating team. Concerning 'humiliation on the world stage', What could be more humiliating for 'The Mother of Parliaments' and 'The home of Democracy', than the spectacle of an undemocratic government railroading through a decision that the population now probably regrets but will have been denied the democratic right to recant/confirm a possible 'No deal', bail out without a parachute. Poll	The British public voted to leave the EU. Democratic will requires that the outcome of the referendum must be respected, thus the UK must leave the EU regardless of the deal secured.	Remaining in the EU would exacerbate political instability.
remaining could correspond to the democratic will (expressed through a vote, through parliament, …)	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.1.	Remaining could correspond to the democratic will (expressed through a vote, through parliament, …)	con	
leaving in a way which is harmful to the uk may do even more damage to the uk's reputation.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.2.	Leaving in a way which is harmful to the UK may do even more damage to the UK's reputation.	con	
both remaining or leaving might harm democracy, and the uk is already humiliated by an incompetent negotiating team. concerning 'humiliation on the world stage', what could be more humiliating for 'the mother of parliaments' and 'the home of democracy', than the spectacle of an undemocratic government railroading through a decision that the population now probably regrets but will have been denied the democratic right to recant/confirm a possible 'no deal', bail out without a parachute. poll	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.3.	Both remaining or leaving might harm democracy, and the UK is already humiliated by an incompetent negotiating team. Concerning 'humiliation on the world stage', What could be more humiliating for 'The Mother of Parliaments' and 'The home of Democracy', than the spectacle of an undemocratic government railroading through a decision that the population now probably regrets but will have been denied the democratic right to recant/confirm a possible 'No deal', bail out without a parachute. Poll	con	
the british public voted to leave the eu. democratic will requires that the outcome of the referendum must be respected, thus the uk must leave the eu regardless of the deal secured.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.	The British public voted to leave the EU. Democratic will requires that the outcome of the referendum must be respected, thus the UK must leave the EU regardless of the deal secured.	pro	Remaining in the EU would undermine the UK citizens' faith in democracy.	There was not a clear majority, only 51.89% voted Leave. There should have been at least 10% threshold to ensure a clear majority. Such a momentous change in national circumstance should not rest on such an insignificant majority.	The fact that Brexit negotiations have been so difficult has further convinced many Leave voters that the EU is un-democratic and impinges on British sovereignty.	Only a minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to leave.	The UK not leaving the EU would, to those who voted Leave, be a strong indication that their vote in the 2016 referendum did not carry any weight. This could result in reduced voter turnout as people think their votes don't matter.	The turnout for the Brexit Referendum was higher than that of any general election since 1997 (at 72.2%	Because of how divided the country is, reversing the referendum would require a level of nationwide consensus building that is unprecedented in modern history.	Referenda are not legally binding in the United Kingdom, as it is recognised that Parliament has sovereign authority.	It is the primary job of any government to protect its citizens, even if that means sometimes doing things the public doesn’t like or doesn’t understand. If there are clear arguments against a hard Brexit then the UK should not leave the EU.	The Brexit Referendum did not generate consensus, with Scotland and Northern Ireland voting to remain.	Evidence suggests that the democratic will of the British people has changed since the EU referendum in 2016.	The EU referendum was not carried out in the spirit of open and fair democracy, which means that the result is unlikely to be a true reflection of democratic will.	Even though the UK voted to leave the EU, it is unclear what the democratic will is with regards to how this is done.
remaining in the eu would undermine the uk citizens' faith in democracy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.	Remaining in the EU would undermine the UK citizens' faith in democracy.	pro	If a decision to remain in the EU was framed as an acknowledgment that the promises made by the leave side in the referendum campaign were entirely unachievable, and that therefore to remain is "the best possible deal", this could reinforce or strengthen democracy.	The Remain voters tended to come from the "elite classes" with higher levels of education or held professional/managerial roles. Choosing to remain could be seen as the popular will being overcome by the wishes of the elite.	A majority of voters who did not vote in the 2015 election voted in the Brexit referendum. 60% of this group voted leave. A decision to not leave the European Union may disenfranchise these new voters (Swales K., 2016, pg. 19	Data suggests there is popular support for a second referendum once the Brexit terms are revealed.	Part of the argument for leaving is that Parliament should be sovereign. Parliament is a democratically elected body. If Parliament decides that hard Brexit is not in the best interests of the UK, then this would be a democratic action.	Only a minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to leave.	Many people were denied a vote in the referendum; this was profoundly undemocratic.	The referendum was advisory only. It fundamentally undermines UK democracy to change the nature of the vote from advisory to binding after the results are in.	Implementing a Brexit that does not meet the promises made by Leave politicians or fulfill the expections of Brexiteers will undermine the UK citizens faith in democracy.	The turnout for the Brexit Referendum was higher than that of any general election since 1997 (at 72.2%	Whatever the eventual consequences of a hard Brexit would be, preserving the basic social contract that gives legitimacy to a modern democracy is almost certainly more important.
if a decision to remain in the eu was framed as an acknowledgment that the promises made by the leave side in the referendum campaign were entirely unachievable, and that therefore to remain is "the best possible deal", this could reinforce or strengthen democracy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.1.	If a decision to remain in the EU was framed as an acknowledgment that the promises made by the leave side in the referendum campaign were entirely unachievable, and that therefore to remain is "the best possible deal", this could reinforce or strengthen democracy.	con	
the remain voters tended to come from the "elite classes" with higher levels of education or held professional/managerial roles. choosing to remain could be seen as the popular will being overcome by the wishes of the elite.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.	The Remain voters tended to come from the "elite classes" with higher levels of education or held professional/managerial roles. Choosing to remain could be seen as the popular will being overcome by the wishes of the elite.	pro	The key figures behind the Leave campaign (politicans, donors and media owners) are all very wealthy and could well be argued are part of the "elite".	Whilst yes the ABs (The "Elite" classes were the only social group to have a remain majority (57%), a much more decisive predictor of wishing to remain was age. 73% of 18-24s, 62% of 25-34s and 52% of 35-45s.	The pro-Brexit campaign was heavily support by wealthy individuals, largely being funded by five of the UK's wealthiest business men. Nigel Farage, perhaps the most prominent Leave voice, is personally very wealthy.	So called ''elite classes'', by nature of their higher level of education, would be more likely to be properly informed on issues.	Most of those working voted Remain.
the key figures behind the leave campaign (politicans, donors and media owners) are all very wealthy and could well be argued are part of the "elite".	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.1.	The key figures behind the Leave campaign (politicans, donors and media owners) are all very wealthy and could well be argued are part of the "elite".	con	Members of the elite establishment were present on both sides of the debate. That does not change that fact that Remain voters were more likely to have gone to university, and were on average wealthier.
members of the elite establishment were present on both sides of the debate. that does not change that fact that remain voters were more likely to have gone to university, and were on average wealthier.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.1.1.	Members of the elite establishment were present on both sides of the debate. That does not change that fact that Remain voters were more likely to have gone to university, and were on average wealthier.	pro	
whilst yes the abs (the "elite" classes were the only social group to have a remain majority (57%), a much more decisive predictor of wishing to remain was age. 73% of 18-24s, 62% of 25-34s and 52% of 35-45s.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.2.	Whilst yes the ABs (The "Elite" classes were the only social group to have a remain majority (57%), a much more decisive predictor of wishing to remain was age. 73% of 18-24s, 62% of 25-34s and 52% of 35-45s.	con	
the pro-brexit campaign was heavily support by wealthy individuals, largely being funded by five of the uk's wealthiest business men. nigel farage, perhaps the most prominent leave voice, is personally very wealthy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.3.	The pro-Brexit campaign was heavily support by wealthy individuals, largely being funded by five of the UK's wealthiest business men. Nigel Farage, perhaps the most prominent Leave voice, is personally very wealthy.	con	Members of the elite establishment were present on both sides of the debate. That does not change that fact that Remain voters were more likely to have gone to university, and were on average wealthier.
so called ''elite classes'', by nature of their higher level of education, would be more likely to be properly informed on issues.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.4.	So called ''elite classes'', by nature of their higher level of education, would be more likely to be properly informed on issues.	con	
most of those working voted remain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.2.5.	Most of those working voted Remain.	con	
a majority of voters who did not vote in the 2015 election voted in the brexit referendum. 60% of this group voted leave. a decision to not leave the european union may disenfranchise these new voters (swales k., 2016, pg. 19	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.3.	A majority of voters who did not vote in the 2015 election voted in the Brexit referendum. 60% of this group voted leave. A decision to not leave the European Union may disenfranchise these new voters (Swales K., 2016, pg. 19	pro	These people can vote for a Brexit party at the next election if they want. They are not disenfranchised.	That these people have never voted for or against a representative suggests perhaps that they do not understand the principles of representative democracy, in which case they clearly did not understand the nature of the referendum which was consultative, irrespective of what David Cameron (UK Prime Minister during the referendum campaign) might claim.
these people can vote for a brexit party at the next election if they want. they are not disenfranchised.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.3.1.	These people can vote for a Brexit party at the next election if they want. They are not disenfranchised.	con	
that these people have never voted for or against a representative suggests perhaps that they do not understand the principles of representative democracy, in which case they clearly did not understand the nature of the referendum which was consultative, irrespective of what david cameron (uk prime minister during the referendum campaign) might claim.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.3.2.	That these people have never voted for or against a representative suggests perhaps that they do not understand the principles of representative democracy, in which case they clearly did not understand the nature of the referendum which was consultative, irrespective of what David Cameron (UK Prime Minister during the referendum campaign) might claim.	con	
data suggests there is popular support for a second referendum once the brexit terms are revealed.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.4.	Data suggests there is popular support for a second referendum once the Brexit terms are revealed.	con	In 2015, Vote Leave director Dominic Cummings admitted before the referendum that defining Brexit would lose votes and that even Eurosceptic MPs could not agree on what Brexit should entail. He proposed a referendum on the final deal himself to gain public consensus.	A second referendum or a Brexit-focused vote, specifically on the deal the UK ends up with, possibly with an option to stay, would not necessarily undermine the will of the people. It may in fact strengthen it. It can be explained as a further exercise of democracy, and if so explained, not undermine citizens' belief in democracy at all.	Even Nigel Farage has come out in support of a second referendum.
in 2015, vote leave director dominic cummings admitted before the referendum that defining brexit would lose votes and that even eurosceptic mps could not agree on what brexit should entail. he proposed a referendum on the final deal himself to gain public consensus.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.4.1.	In 2015, Vote Leave director Dominic Cummings admitted before the referendum that defining Brexit would lose votes and that even Eurosceptic MPs could not agree on what Brexit should entail. He proposed a referendum on the final deal himself to gain public consensus.	con	
a second referendum or a brexit-focused vote, specifically on the deal the uk ends up with, possibly with an option to stay, would not necessarily undermine the will of the people. it may in fact strengthen it. it can be explained as a further exercise of democracy, and if so explained, not undermine citizens' belief in democracy at all.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.4.2.	A second referendum or a Brexit-focused vote, specifically on the deal the UK ends up with, possibly with an option to stay, would not necessarily undermine the will of the people. It may in fact strengthen it. It can be explained as a further exercise of democracy, and if so explained, not undermine citizens' belief in democracy at all.	con	
even nigel farage has come out in support of a second referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.4.3.	Even Nigel Farage has come out in support of a second referendum.	con	
part of the argument for leaving is that parliament should be sovereign. parliament is a democratically elected body. if parliament decides that hard brexit is not in the best interests of the uk, then this would be a democratic action.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.5.	Part of the argument for leaving is that Parliament should be sovereign. Parliament is a democratically elected body. If Parliament decides that hard Brexit is not in the best interests of the UK, then this would be a democratic action.	con	This would be an undemocratic decision as parliament would not be representative of the people's vote in the referendum.
this would be an undemocratic decision as parliament would not be representative of the people's vote in the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.5.1.	This would be an undemocratic decision as parliament would not be representative of the people's vote in the referendum.	pro	Our democracy is based on representation, and the duty of MPs is to vote with their conscience.
our democracy is based on representation, and the duty of mps is to vote with their conscience.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.5.1.1.	Our democracy is based on representation, and the duty of MPs is to vote with their conscience.	con	
only a minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to leave.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.	Only a minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to leave.	con	There is no reason to believe that those who did not vote would have voted in a different proportion to those who did vote.	A much smaller minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to stay.	The British 'public' did not vote Leave. The British 'public' far outnumber those in The electorate who voted Leave, but are still profoundly affected by the government's decision to do so. Leave only achieved 3.78% majority of the electorate, not the public.	This is juggling with numbers. The rules of the referendum were clear. With the amount of media attention the referendum got there was no way that anyone could not know about this event and its rules.
there is no reason to believe that those who did not vote would have voted in a different proportion to those who did vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.1.	There is no reason to believe that those who did not vote would have voted in a different proportion to those who did vote.	pro	
a much smaller minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to stay.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.2.	A much smaller minority of those who were eligible to vote voted to stay.	pro	A bit under two percent is not much smaller.
a bit under two percent is not much smaller.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.2.1.	A bit under two percent is not much smaller.	con	1.3 million more people is much bigger.  This is about equivalent to the entire population of Estonia, and bigger than the entire populations of 3 other EU states.
1.3 million more people is much bigger.  this is about equivalent to the entire population of estonia, and bigger than the entire populations of 3 other eu states.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.2.1.1.	1.3 million more people is much bigger.  This is about equivalent to the entire population of Estonia, and bigger than the entire populations of 3 other EU states.	pro	
the british 'public' did not vote leave. the british 'public' far outnumber those in the electorate who voted leave, but are still profoundly affected by the government's decision to do so. leave only achieved 3.78% majority of the electorate, not the public.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.3.	The British 'public' did not vote Leave. The British 'public' far outnumber those in The electorate who voted Leave, but are still profoundly affected by the government's decision to do so. Leave only achieved 3.78% majority of the electorate, not the public.	con	
this is juggling with numbers. the rules of the referendum were clear. with the amount of media attention the referendum got there was no way that anyone could not know about this event and its rules.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.6.4.	This is juggling with numbers. The rules of the referendum were clear. With the amount of media attention the referendum got there was no way that anyone could not know about this event and its rules.	pro	
many people were denied a vote in the referendum; this was profoundly undemocratic.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.	Many people were denied a vote in the referendum; this was profoundly undemocratic.	con	Democracy does not mean that every man and his dog are eligible to vote. Rules and regulations on voting eligibility are necessary in a democracy to prevent abuse.	Approximately 1.5 million young people (16-17), who polled overwhelmingly in favour of staying in the EU, were not allowed to vote.	More than 1 million Britons, who had been living in Europe for over 15 years, were denied a vote in the referendum.	Approximately 1.5 million Europeans working in the UK were denied a vote.	Nationals of most EU states, who pay tax and can vote in some other elections, were not allowed to vote in the EU referendum. They should have been allowed to vote.
democracy does not mean that every man and his dog are eligible to vote. rules and regulations on voting eligibility are necessary in a democracy to prevent abuse.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.1.	Democracy does not mean that every man and his dog are eligible to vote. Rules and regulations on voting eligibility are necessary in a democracy to prevent abuse.	pro	Rules disqualifying the people most affected by the decision from voting in it were not necessary to prevent abuse. They were, instead, effectively a form of voter suppression - forcing the people most hurt by the decision to have no say in it. Nor is there any evidence that restricting voting eligibility is 'necessary to prevent abuse' - on the contrary, the most common form of abuse in some democracies is abusive rules intended to prevent voting.
rules disqualifying the people most affected by the decision from voting in it were not necessary to prevent abuse. they were, instead, effectively a form of voter suppression - forcing the people most hurt by the decision to have no say in it. nor is there any evidence that restricting voting eligibility is 'necessary to prevent abuse' - on the contrary, the most common form of abuse in some democracies is abusive rules intended to prevent voting.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.1.1.	Rules disqualifying the people most affected by the decision from voting in it were not necessary to prevent abuse. They were, instead, effectively a form of voter suppression - forcing the people most hurt by the decision to have no say in it. Nor is there any evidence that restricting voting eligibility is 'necessary to prevent abuse' - on the contrary, the most common form of abuse in some democracies is abusive rules intended to prevent voting.	con	
approximately 1.5 million young people (16-17), who polled overwhelmingly in favour of staying in the eu, were not allowed to vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.2.	Approximately 1.5 million young people (16-17), who polled overwhelmingly in favour of staying in the EU, were not allowed to vote.	con	Under 18’s can also not vote in UK General Elections, Local Elections, or European elections so it is disingenuous to say they were ‘not allowed’ implying that this is exceptional.	Even if those 16 or over could vote, an overwhelming majority would have to vote remain and not abstain in order to overrule leave votes. 16-17 year olds made up Roughly 1,428,000 of the voting population at the time. 89% of Scottish 16-17 year olds registered to vote in the Scottish referendum, and 84.6% of those actually voted, which totals 75.3% of 16-17 year olds. Assuming similar proportions in the EU vote, only 1,075,198 votes would have been cast. This is not enough to change the outcome.
under 18’s can also not vote in uk general elections, local elections, or european elections so it is disingenuous to say they were ‘not allowed’ implying that this is exceptional.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.2.1.	Under 18’s can also not vote in UK General Elections, Local Elections, or European elections so it is disingenuous to say they were ‘not allowed’ implying that this is exceptional.	pro	
even if those 16 or over could vote, an overwhelming majority would have to vote remain and not abstain in order to overrule leave votes. 16-17 year olds made up roughly 1,428,000 of the voting population at the time. 89% of scottish 16-17 year olds registered to vote in the scottish referendum, and 84.6% of those actually voted, which totals 75.3% of 16-17 year olds. assuming similar proportions in the eu vote, only 1,075,198 votes would have been cast. this is not enough to change the outcome.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.2.2.	Even if those 16 or over could vote, an overwhelming majority would have to vote remain and not abstain in order to overrule leave votes. 16-17 year olds made up Roughly 1,428,000 of the voting population at the time. 89% of Scottish 16-17 year olds registered to vote in the Scottish referendum, and 84.6% of those actually voted, which totals 75.3% of 16-17 year olds. Assuming similar proportions in the EU vote, only 1,075,198 votes would have been cast. This is not enough to change the outcome.	pro	
more than 1 million britons, who had been living in europe for over 15 years, were denied a vote in the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.3.	More than 1 million Britons, who had been living in Europe for over 15 years, were denied a vote in the referendum.	con	
approximately 1.5 million europeans working in the uk were denied a vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.4.	Approximately 1.5 million Europeans working in the UK were denied a vote.	con	
nationals of most eu states, who pay tax and can vote in some other elections, were not allowed to vote in the eu referendum. they should have been allowed to vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.5.	Nationals of most EU states, who pay tax and can vote in some other elections, were not allowed to vote in the EU referendum. They should have been allowed to vote.	con	Paying taxes is not a prerequisite for voting eligibility. If it were then very poor people, for example, may be excluded. It is not unreasonable to limit voting on matters of state to people who have fealty to said state.	Everyone who is eligible to vote in UK general elections was eligible to vote in the referendum.	Britain is actually much more liberal on voting rights than many other countries, and so by international standards EU citizens should NOT have been allowed to vote. For example, only Irish citizens can vote in Irish referendums. Germany does not allow any non-German EU citizens to vote in general elections, even if resident in Germany for decades.	Every visitor to the UK who buys something pays tax in the form of VAT. Paying UK taxes does not entitle nationals of 3rd countries to vote.
paying taxes is not a prerequisite for voting eligibility. if it were then very poor people, for example, may be excluded. it is not unreasonable to limit voting on matters of state to people who have fealty to said state.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.5.1.	Paying taxes is not a prerequisite for voting eligibility. If it were then very poor people, for example, may be excluded. It is not unreasonable to limit voting on matters of state to people who have fealty to said state.	pro	
everyone who is eligible to vote in uk general elections was eligible to vote in the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.5.2.	Everyone who is eligible to vote in UK general elections was eligible to vote in the referendum.	pro	
britain is actually much more liberal on voting rights than many other countries, and so by international standards eu citizens should not have been allowed to vote. for example, only irish citizens can vote in irish referendums. germany does not allow any non-german eu citizens to vote in general elections, even if resident in germany for decades.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.5.3.	Britain is actually much more liberal on voting rights than many other countries, and so by international standards EU citizens should NOT have been allowed to vote. For example, only Irish citizens can vote in Irish referendums. Germany does not allow any non-German EU citizens to vote in general elections, even if resident in Germany for decades.	pro	
every visitor to the uk who buys something pays tax in the form of vat. paying uk taxes does not entitle nationals of 3rd countries to vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.7.5.4.	Every visitor to the UK who buys something pays tax in the form of VAT. Paying UK taxes does not entitle nationals of 3rd countries to vote.	pro	
the referendum was advisory only. it fundamentally undermines uk democracy to change the nature of the vote from advisory to binding after the results are in.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.8.	The referendum was advisory only. It fundamentally undermines UK democracy to change the nature of the vote from advisory to binding after the results are in.	con	Parliament voted to implement the decision by triggering Art. 50 by an overwhelming majority.
parliament voted to implement the decision by triggering art. 50 by an overwhelming majority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.8.1.	Parliament voted to implement the decision by triggering Art. 50 by an overwhelming majority.	pro	
implementing a brexit that does not meet the promises made by leave politicians or fulfill the expections of brexiteers will undermine the uk citizens faith in democracy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.9.	Implementing a Brexit that does not meet the promises made by Leave politicians or fulfill the expections of Brexiteers will undermine the UK citizens faith in democracy.	con	
the turnout for the brexit referendum was higher than that of any general election since 1997 (at 72.2%	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.	The turnout for the Brexit Referendum was higher than that of any general election since 1997 (at 72.2%	pro	Only 27% of UK residents voted to leave while millions were denied a vote in the referendum.	General elections since 1997 are a poor basis for comparision. The circumstances and procedure were significantly different between the two, so it is inappropriate to compare the two turnout rates.
only 27% of uk residents voted to leave while millions were denied a vote in the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.1.	Only 27% of UK residents voted to leave while millions were denied a vote in the referendum.	con	Many people were denied a vote in the referendum; this was profoundly undemocratic.	Even though this is true, even fewer people voted to remain. In a binary vote, anyone who chooses to abstain from the vote submits themselves to the result. You absolutely cannot protest a vote of this nature by means of abstaining. There is no third option.	Even if those 16 or over could vote, an overwhelming majority would have to vote remain and not abstain in order to overrule leave votes. 16-17 year olds made up Roughly 1,428,000 of the voting population at the time. 89% of Scottish 16-17 year olds registered to vote in the Scottish referendum, and 84.6% of those actually voted, which totals 75.3% of 16-17 year olds. Assuming similar proportions in the EU vote, only 1,075,198 votes would have been cast. This is not enough to change the outcome.
even though this is true, even fewer people voted to remain. in a binary vote, anyone who chooses to abstain from the vote submits themselves to the result. you absolutely cannot protest a vote of this nature by means of abstaining. there is no third option.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.1.2.	Even though this is true, even fewer people voted to remain. In a binary vote, anyone who chooses to abstain from the vote submits themselves to the result. You absolutely cannot protest a vote of this nature by means of abstaining. There is no third option.	pro	
general elections since 1997 are a poor basis for comparision. the circumstances and procedure were significantly different between the two, so it is inappropriate to compare the two turnout rates.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.2.	General elections since 1997 are a poor basis for comparision. The circumstances and procedure were significantly different between the two, so it is inappropriate to compare the two turnout rates.	con	Selecting a limited sample of voter turnout misrepresents turnout in general. Low voter turnout in general elections is a recent and potentially temporary phenomenon. Voter turnout did not drop below 70% from 1922 to 1997 and averaged over 75% from 1945 to 1997.	Recent general elections have suffered from voter apathy caused by a lack of clear choice, which encourages turnout to be low.	The Scottish Independence Referendum with a comparable question and situtation had a considerably higher turnout of 84.6%.
selecting a limited sample of voter turnout misrepresents turnout in general. low voter turnout in general elections is a recent and potentially temporary phenomenon. voter turnout did not drop below 70% from 1922 to 1997 and averaged over 75% from 1945 to 1997.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.2.1.	Selecting a limited sample of voter turnout misrepresents turnout in general. Low voter turnout in general elections is a recent and potentially temporary phenomenon. Voter turnout did not drop below 70% from 1922 to 1997 and averaged over 75% from 1945 to 1997.	con	
recent general elections have suffered from voter apathy caused by a lack of clear choice, which encourages turnout to be low.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.2.2.	Recent general elections have suffered from voter apathy caused by a lack of clear choice, which encourages turnout to be low.	con	
the scottish independence referendum with a comparable question and situtation had a considerably higher turnout of 84.6%.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.10.2.3.	The Scottish Independence Referendum with a comparable question and situtation had a considerably higher turnout of 84.6%.	con	
whatever the eventual consequences of a hard brexit would be, preserving the basic social contract that gives legitimacy to a modern democracy is almost certainly more important.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.11.	Whatever the eventual consequences of a hard Brexit would be, preserving the basic social contract that gives legitimacy to a modern democracy is almost certainly more important.	pro	The idea of a 'social contract' is (mostly) that citizens have surrendered decision-making power to the government, in exchange for a protection of their rights and security. Accepting the results of non-binding referenda (with a very narrow majority) as binding, without nuance, may undermine the objective of the social contract by not protecting the rights and security of a large portion of those citizens.
the idea of a 'social contract' is (mostly) that citizens have surrendered decision-making power to the government, in exchange for a protection of their rights and security. accepting the results of non-binding referenda (with a very narrow majority) as binding, without nuance, may undermine the objective of the social contract by not protecting the rights and security of a large portion of those citizens.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.1.11.1.	The idea of a 'social contract' is (mostly) that citizens have surrendered decision-making power to the government, in exchange for a protection of their rights and security. Accepting the results of non-binding referenda (with a very narrow majority) as binding, without nuance, may undermine the objective of the social contract by not protecting the rights and security of a large portion of those citizens.	con	
there was not a clear majority, only 51.89% voted leave. there should have been at least 10% threshold to ensure a clear majority. such a momentous change in national circumstance should not rest on such an insignificant majority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.2.	There was not a clear majority, only 51.89% voted Leave. There should have been at least 10% threshold to ensure a clear majority. Such a momentous change in national circumstance should not rest on such an insignificant majority.	con	A majority is still a majority, and other elections and general elections don't have a 10% threshold, so the referendum should not either.
a majority is still a majority, and other elections and general elections don't have a 10% threshold, so the referendum should not either.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.2.1.	A majority is still a majority, and other elections and general elections don't have a 10% threshold, so the referendum should not either.	pro	A referendum is not an election. In an election the stronger the majority the more powerful the government. The weaker the majority, the more a government needs to consider the wider appeal of its policies.	Constitutional change often requires a supermajority.
a referendum is not an election. in an election the stronger the majority the more powerful the government. the weaker the majority, the more a government needs to consider the wider appeal of its policies.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.2.1.1.	A referendum is not an election. In an election the stronger the majority the more powerful the government. The weaker the majority, the more a government needs to consider the wider appeal of its policies.	con	A government with a weak majority would have to be more careful to appeal to all factions within its ruling group.
a government with a weak majority would have to be more careful to appeal to all factions within its ruling group.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.2.1.1.1.	A government with a weak majority would have to be more careful to appeal to all factions within its ruling group.	pro	
constitutional change often requires a supermajority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.2.1.2.	Constitutional change often requires a supermajority.	con	
the fact that brexit negotiations have been so difficult has further convinced many leave voters that the eu is un-democratic and impinges on british sovereignty.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.3.	The fact that Brexit negotiations have been so difficult has further convinced many Leave voters that the EU is un-democratic and impinges on British sovereignty.	pro	Negotiations have been so difficult because the UK government did not plan enough time before triggering Article 50 to begin those negotiations.	Negotiations have mainly been between competing factions of the Tory party, rather than with the EU.	The EU is not democratic.	Increased conviction of Leavers to Leave can largely be attributed to confirmation bias. Many Remainers view the failure of negiotations as increased evidence for remaining.
negotiations have been so difficult because the uk government did not plan enough time before triggering article 50 to begin those negotiations.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.3.1.	Negotiations have been so difficult because the UK government did not plan enough time before triggering Article 50 to begin those negotiations.	con	
negotiations have mainly been between competing factions of the tory party, rather than with the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.3.2.	Negotiations have mainly been between competing factions of the Tory party, rather than with the EU.	con	
increased conviction of leavers to leave can largely be attributed to confirmation bias. many remainers view the failure of negiotations as increased evidence for remaining.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.3.4.	Increased conviction of Leavers to Leave can largely be attributed to confirmation bias. Many Remainers view the failure of negiotations as increased evidence for remaining.	con	
the uk not leaving the eu would, to those who voted leave, be a strong indication that their vote in the 2016 referendum did not carry any weight. this could result in reduced voter turnout as people think their votes don't matter.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.	The UK not leaving the EU would, to those who voted Leave, be a strong indication that their vote in the 2016 referendum did not carry any weight. This could result in reduced voter turnout as people think their votes don't matter.	pro	The public has lost faith in the democratic process however the Brexit mess plays out.	The 2016 referendum was advisory and as such did not carry any legal weight. That this point wasn't made clear and indeed promises were made that couldn't be kept that have since been exploited by populists, is unfortunate but we live in a democracy and citizens have responsibilities as well as rights, they should understand the political process and that any brexit outcome does have any bearing on the importance of their vote matters in legally constituted elections.	Their votes have been valued, parliament has spent the last 3 years talking about very little else but how to enact brexit. There's been a strangely divisive approach to turning a terribly vague, ill-defined position that people voted for into a terribly unpopular and damaging set of options. This is how democracy works.
the public has lost faith in the democratic process however the brexit mess plays out.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.1.	The public has lost faith in the democratic process however the Brexit mess plays out.	con	At least part of that is because the public conflate the referendum with British democracy. It has brought that into disrepute.	Brexit is no more nor less than a total breakdown in faith in the democratic process. Whatever reasons people had for voting to leave, they all revolve in a loss of that faith: whether it is faith in the democratic processes of the EU, in our government's ability to realise our proper place in it, or voting leave because they have simply lost faith in our political system and see this as a chance to express that opinion.
at least part of that is because the public conflate the referendum with british democracy. it has brought that into disrepute.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.1.1.	At least part of that is because the public conflate the referendum with British democracy. It has brought that into disrepute.	con	The holding of referendums is not a conventional part of British Democracy: Parliament being sovereign and thus able to hold one does not contradict that there is no pre-determined format or voting franchise for any such vote. British democracy is now, as it has been, elected officials using the superior knowledge available to them to make the hard choices. Parliament giving the suspect (the EU) to the lynch mob was irresponsible.
the holding of referendums is not a conventional part of british democracy: parliament being sovereign and thus able to hold one does not contradict that there is no pre-determined format or voting franchise for any such vote. british democracy is now, as it has been, elected officials using the superior knowledge available to them to make the hard choices. parliament giving the suspect (the eu) to the lynch mob was irresponsible.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.1.1.1.	The holding of referendums is not a conventional part of British Democracy: Parliament being sovereign and thus able to hold one does not contradict that there is no pre-determined format or voting franchise for any such vote. British democracy is now, as it has been, elected officials using the superior knowledge available to them to make the hard choices. Parliament giving the suspect (the EU) to the lynch mob was irresponsible.	con	
brexit is no more nor less than a total breakdown in faith in the democratic process. whatever reasons people had for voting to leave, they all revolve in a loss of that faith: whether it is faith in the democratic processes of the eu, in our government's ability to realise our proper place in it, or voting leave because they have simply lost faith in our political system and see this as a chance to express that opinion.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.1.2.	Brexit is no more nor less than a total breakdown in faith in the democratic process. Whatever reasons people had for voting to leave, they all revolve in a loss of that faith: whether it is faith in the democratic processes of the EU, in our government's ability to realise our proper place in it, or voting leave because they have simply lost faith in our political system and see this as a chance to express that opinion.	pro	
the 2016 referendum was advisory and as such did not carry any legal weight. that this point wasn't made clear and indeed promises were made that couldn't be kept that have since been exploited by populists, is unfortunate but we live in a democracy and citizens have responsibilities as well as rights, they should understand the political process and that any brexit outcome does have any bearing on the importance of their vote matters in legally constituted elections.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.	The 2016 referendum was advisory and as such did not carry any legal weight. That this point wasn't made clear and indeed promises were made that couldn't be kept that have since been exploited by populists, is unfortunate but we live in a democracy and citizens have responsibilities as well as rights, they should understand the political process and that any brexit outcome does have any bearing on the importance of their vote matters in legally constituted elections.	con	If we have to follow through and do everything that is promised by people who don't have the authority to promise it, we'll end up in a right old mess.	Regardless of any moral obligation to understand, many won't.	Referenda are not legally binding in the United Kingdom, as it is recognised that Parliament has sovereign authority.
if we have to follow through and do everything that is promised by people who don't have the authority to promise it, we'll end up in a right old mess.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.1.	If we have to follow through and do everything that is promised by people who don't have the authority to promise it, we'll end up in a right old mess.	con	
regardless of any moral obligation to understand, many won't.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.2.	Regardless of any moral obligation to understand, many won't.	pro	The lack of understanding is in some part due to politicians and newsmedia failing to accurately explain.
the lack of understanding is in some part due to politicians and newsmedia failing to accurately explain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.2.1.	The lack of understanding is in some part due to politicians and newsmedia failing to accurately explain.	pro	
referenda are not legally binding in the united kingdom, as it is recognised that parliament has sovereign authority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.3.	Referenda are not legally binding in the United Kingdom, as it is recognised that Parliament has sovereign authority.	con	The referendum was advisory only. It fundamentally undermines UK democracy to change the nature of the vote from advisory to binding after the results are in.	The EU referendum was not a General Election. There is no legal precedent on implementing the "democratic will" of the referendum before the Government defines the details of its interpretation of Brexit. A Government interpretation of what Brexit means is not the "will of the people".	British constitutional law is not codified and operates partially through conventions or customs. Respecting the outcome of a referendum is an important convention, even if not codified.	The referendum was legally advisory, and no supermajority was therefore required. It has only become politically binding during the referendum campaign, but this is not something that Parliament could vote for or against. If it was legally binding, Parliament might have insisted on a supermajority.
the eu referendum was not a general election. there is no legal precedent on implementing the "democratic will" of the referendum before the government defines the details of its interpretation of brexit. a government interpretation of what brexit means is not the "will of the people".	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.3.2.	The EU referendum was not a General Election. There is no legal precedent on implementing the "democratic will" of the referendum before the Government defines the details of its interpretation of Brexit. A Government interpretation of what Brexit means is not the "will of the people".	con	
british constitutional law is not codified and operates partially through conventions or customs. respecting the outcome of a referendum is an important convention, even if not codified.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.3.3.	British constitutional law is not codified and operates partially through conventions or customs. Respecting the outcome of a referendum is an important convention, even if not codified.	pro	The holding of referendums is not a conventional part of British Democracy: Parliament being sovereign and thus able to hold one does not contradict that there is no pre-determined format or voting franchise for any such vote. British democracy is now, as it has been, elected officials using the superior knowledge available to them to make the hard choices. Parliament giving the suspect (the EU) to the lynch mob was irresponsible.	In 1890, one of the foremost constitutional theorists, A.V. Dicey noted that a referendum ought to be an authoritative judgment on matters of constitutional importance, and therefore accepting its result should be a powerful convention.
in 1890, one of the foremost constitutional theorists, a.v. dicey noted that a referendum ought to be an authoritative judgment on matters of constitutional importance, and therefore accepting its result should be a powerful convention.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.3.3.2.	In 1890, one of the foremost constitutional theorists, A.V. Dicey noted that a referendum ought to be an authoritative judgment on matters of constitutional importance, and therefore accepting its result should be a powerful convention.	pro	Constitutional changes conventionally require a supermajority.
constitutional changes conventionally require a supermajority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.3.3.2.1.	Constitutional changes conventionally require a supermajority.	con	
the referendum was legally advisory, and no supermajority was therefore required. it has only become politically binding during the referendum campaign, but this is not something that parliament could vote for or against. if it was legally binding, parliament might have insisted on a supermajority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.2.3.4.	The referendum was legally advisory, and no supermajority was therefore required. It has only become politically binding during the referendum campaign, but this is not something that Parliament could vote for or against. If it was legally binding, Parliament might have insisted on a supermajority.	con	
their votes have been valued, parliament has spent the last 3 years talking about very little else but how to enact brexit. there's been a strangely divisive approach to turning a terribly vague, ill-defined position that people voted for into a terribly unpopular and damaging set of options. this is how democracy works.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.5.3.	Their votes have been valued, parliament has spent the last 3 years talking about very little else but how to enact brexit. There's been a strangely divisive approach to turning a terribly vague, ill-defined position that people voted for into a terribly unpopular and damaging set of options. This is how democracy works.	con	
because of how divided the country is, reversing the referendum would require a level of nationwide consensus building that is unprecedented in modern history.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.7.	Because of how divided the country is, reversing the referendum would require a level of nationwide consensus building that is unprecedented in modern history.	pro	Unprecedented things can and do happen. That's where precedents come from.	The referendum result itself was a large factor in dividing the country - Scotland and Northern Ireland both voted to Remain (both by a significant margin - 62% and 55.8% respectively), but the overall result was marginal towards leave due to a small lead in England (53.4%) and Wales (52.5%).	Because every possible version of Brexit is opposed not just by remainers, but by some factions of leavers as well, following through on the referendum would require an even-greater level of consensus-building.
unprecedented things can and do happen. that's where precedents come from.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.7.1.	Unprecedented things can and do happen. That's where precedents come from.	con	
the referendum result itself was a large factor in dividing the country - scotland and northern ireland both voted to remain (both by a significant margin - 62% and 55.8% respectively), but the overall result was marginal towards leave due to a small lead in england (53.4%) and wales (52.5%).	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.7.2.	The referendum result itself was a large factor in dividing the country - Scotland and Northern Ireland both voted to Remain (both by a significant margin - 62% and 55.8% respectively), but the overall result was marginal towards leave due to a small lead in England (53.4%) and Wales (52.5%).	con	Reversing the referendum without an electoral mandate may well heighten, not soften, the bitterness of that divide.
reversing the referendum without an electoral mandate may well heighten, not soften, the bitterness of that divide.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.7.2.1.	Reversing the referendum without an electoral mandate may well heighten, not soften, the bitterness of that divide.	pro	
because every possible version of brexit is opposed not just by remainers, but by some factions of leavers as well, following through on the referendum would require an even-greater level of consensus-building.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.7.3.	Because every possible version of Brexit is opposed not just by remainers, but by some factions of leavers as well, following through on the referendum would require an even-greater level of consensus-building.	con	
it is the primary job of any government to protect its citizens, even if that means sometimes doing things the public doesn’t like or doesn’t understand. if there are clear arguments against a hard brexit then the uk should not leave the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.	It is the primary job of any government to protect its citizens, even if that means sometimes doing things the public doesn’t like or doesn’t understand. If there are clear arguments against a hard Brexit then the UK should not leave the EU.	con	The implications of Brexit are very complicated and not well understood (even by engaged citizens), the main reason for having a representative democracy is professional politicians can make informed decisions on our behalf.	The introduction of referenda into a system of governance ought not negate the role of parliament as representatives, especially since all present representatives were elected after the referendum, and therefore have a more up-to-date mandate than the referendum itself.	"Democracy is the worst system of government, except for all the others."  What you're espousing here is some sort of oligarchy. Britain, however, is a democracy.	It is inconsistent for the government to ignore the will of the people and yet also claim it is necessary for them to rethink the whole process.
the implications of brexit are very complicated and not well understood (even by engaged citizens), the main reason for having a representative democracy is professional politicians can make informed decisions on our behalf.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.1.	The implications of Brexit are very complicated and not well understood (even by engaged citizens), the main reason for having a representative democracy is professional politicians can make informed decisions on our behalf.	con	37% of the EU's budget was spent on the Common Agricultural Policy in 2018. The benefits/drawbacks of the Common Agricultural Policy have never been discussed prominently and are not well understood by the general public.
37% of the eu's budget was spent on the common agricultural policy in 2018. the benefits/drawbacks of the common agricultural policy have never been discussed prominently and are not well understood by the general public.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.1.1.	37% of the EU's budget was spent on the Common Agricultural Policy in 2018. The benefits/drawbacks of the Common Agricultural Policy have never been discussed prominently and are not well understood by the general public.	con	
the introduction of referenda into a system of governance ought not negate the role of parliament as representatives, especially since all present representatives were elected after the referendum, and therefore have a more up-to-date mandate than the referendum itself.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.2.	The introduction of referenda into a system of governance ought not negate the role of parliament as representatives, especially since all present representatives were elected after the referendum, and therefore have a more up-to-date mandate than the referendum itself.	con	
"democracy is the worst system of government, except for all the others."  what you're espousing here is some sort of oligarchy. britain, however, is a democracy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.3.	"Democracy is the worst system of government, except for all the others."  What you're espousing here is some sort of oligarchy. Britain, however, is a democracy.	pro	Britain is a representative democracy, wherein (at least in principle) legal and political experts are elected to make complicated decisions on behalf of the people, rather than the people making all decisions directly. The EU referendum was itself advisory, to be implemented as parliament saw fit.
britain is a representative democracy, wherein (at least in principle) legal and political experts are elected to make complicated decisions on behalf of the people, rather than the people making all decisions directly. the eu referendum was itself advisory, to be implemented as parliament saw fit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.3.1.	Britain is a representative democracy, wherein (at least in principle) legal and political experts are elected to make complicated decisions on behalf of the people, rather than the people making all decisions directly. The EU referendum was itself advisory, to be implemented as parliament saw fit.	con	
it is inconsistent for the government to ignore the will of the people and yet also claim it is necessary for them to rethink the whole process.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.	It is inconsistent for the government to ignore the will of the people and yet also claim it is necessary for them to rethink the whole process.	pro	Unless Leave voters can decide on a definitive version of Brexit they can all stand behind, there is no real "will of the people". If our Government refuses to offer Britain a vote on the best deal it can negotiate on it's own interpretation of Brexit, when according to polls more people would now vote Remain, then doesn't qualify as democratic. Statistics from 71 polls
unless leave voters can decide on a definitive version of brexit they can all stand behind, there is no real "will of the people". if our government refuses to offer britain a vote on the best deal it can negotiate on it's own interpretation of brexit, when according to polls more people would now vote remain, then doesn't qualify as democratic. statistics from 71 polls	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.	Unless Leave voters can decide on a definitive version of Brexit they can all stand behind, there is no real "will of the people". If our Government refuses to offer Britain a vote on the best deal it can negotiate on it's own interpretation of Brexit, when according to polls more people would now vote Remain, then doesn't qualify as democratic. Statistics from 71 polls	con	Opinion polls are notoriously unreliable as certain opinion sets are less likely to participate in polls than others.
opinion polls are notoriously unreliable as certain opinion sets are less likely to participate in polls than others.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.	Opinion polls are notoriously unreliable as certain opinion sets are less likely to participate in polls than others.	pro	There is no reason either Leavers or Remainers would be less likely to want to express their view.	There are groups that are proportionately less likely to participate in polling and it's inevitable that they will have cross-over correlation with the groups leaver and remainer.	Response rates for telephone surveys have been decreasing, limiting further the coverage of responders.	Good polls use oversampling or undersampling to account for groups who would otherwise be under-represented.
there is no reason either leavers or remainers would be less likely to want to express their view.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.1.	There is no reason either Leavers or Remainers would be less likely to want to express their view.	con	There are groups that are proportionately less likely to participate in polling and it's inevitable that they will have cross-over correlation with the groups leaver and remainer.
there are groups that are proportionately less likely to participate in polling and it's inevitable that they will have cross-over correlation with the groups leaver and remainer.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.1.1.	There are groups that are proportionately less likely to participate in polling and it's inevitable that they will have cross-over correlation with the groups leaver and remainer.	pro	
response rates for telephone surveys have been decreasing, limiting further the coverage of responders.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.3.	Response rates for telephone surveys have been decreasing, limiting further the coverage of responders.	pro	PEW research analysis says any bias introduced into survey data by current levels of participation is limited in scope.	Washington Post data shows little change in the accuracy of several major national surveys, despite plummeting response rates. VP of Survey group SSRS says it "doesn't make any difference compared to the olden days when only one out of five hung up on you, insofar as the people who hang up are fairly random to the people who don't hang up".
pew research analysis says any bias introduced into survey data by current levels of participation is limited in scope.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.3.1.	PEW research analysis says any bias introduced into survey data by current levels of participation is limited in scope.	con	
washington post data shows little change in the accuracy of several major national surveys, despite plummeting response rates. vp of survey group ssrs says it "doesn't make any difference compared to the olden days when only one out of five hung up on you, insofar as the people who hang up are fairly random to the people who don't hang up".	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.3.2.	Washington Post data shows little change in the accuracy of several major national surveys, despite plummeting response rates. VP of Survey group SSRS says it "doesn't make any difference compared to the olden days when only one out of five hung up on you, insofar as the people who hang up are fairly random to the people who don't hang up".	con	
good polls use oversampling or undersampling to account for groups who would otherwise be under-represented.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.9.4.1.1.4.	Good polls use oversampling or undersampling to account for groups who would otherwise be under-represented.	con	
the brexit referendum did not generate consensus, with scotland and northern ireland voting to remain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.10.	The Brexit Referendum did not generate consensus, with Scotland and Northern Ireland voting to remain.	con	The Brexit referendum never set out to seek consensus and only very recently has the government even considered finding a consensus.
the brexit referendum never set out to seek consensus and only very recently has the government even considered finding a consensus.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.10.1.	The Brexit referendum never set out to seek consensus and only very recently has the government even considered finding a consensus.	con	
evidence suggests that the democratic will of the british people has changed since the eu referendum in 2016.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.	Evidence suggests that the democratic will of the British people has changed since the EU referendum in 2016.	con	Polls indicate that public opinion now supports remaining in the EU.	Young voters who were not eligible to vote during the 2016 referendum but are eligible now overwhelmingly support Remain. Carrying on without their consent would be undemocratic.	In democracies, voters should be able to change their mind if new information comes to light.
polls indicate that public opinion now supports remaining in the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.	Polls indicate that public opinion now supports remaining in the EU.	con	Academics predict based on changing demographics that the majority of people will want to remain either now or within years, this is due to the increase in remain votes from young educated people entering the election roll, versus old and uneducated leaving (death).	A political group funded by George Soros that wants to overturn the referendum result has alleged that there are more than 100 constituencies that voted for Brexit but now want to Remain.	Current polls show at most a few percent more votes for remaining in the EU. As Polls are not fully reliable especially by one or two percentage points, they currently only show that public opinion is still pretty evenly split.	YouGov polling found that while slightly more people now think Brexit was the wrong decision, a majority of people still think they should continue with Brexit in some form (a softer Brexit), with only 13% saying Brexit should be abandoned completely.	Combining all early 2018 polls gives an average (once the Don’t Knows are left to one side) of 48.5% for leave, and 51.5% for remain, according to whatUKThinks.org.	The majority of polls before the EU referendum also suggested the UK would vote to stay in the EU. There is no evidence that the polling methodology is now more accurate on this question. Polls are therefore not a reliable indicator of voting behaviour on this issue.
academics predict based on changing demographics that the majority of people will want to remain either now or within years, this is due to the increase in remain votes from young educated people entering the election roll, versus old and uneducated leaving (death).	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.	Academics predict based on changing demographics that the majority of people will want to remain either now or within years, this is due to the increase in remain votes from young educated people entering the election roll, versus old and uneducated leaving (death).	con	The predictions of these academics will likely turn out to be false as according to notable international investors, experienced businessmen and politicians, people across all demographics will increasingly realise from 2020 onwards that they are better served by Britain not being a member of the EU.	The predictions of these academics have not taken into account the probability that individual opinions on being part of the EU will change over time and as people become older, and therefore their predictions are interesting but extremely unreliable.
the predictions of these academics will likely turn out to be false as according to notable international investors, experienced businessmen and politicians, people across all demographics will increasingly realise from 2020 onwards that they are better served by britain not being a member of the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.1.	The predictions of these academics will likely turn out to be false as according to notable international investors, experienced businessmen and politicians, people across all demographics will increasingly realise from 2020 onwards that they are better served by Britain not being a member of the EU.	pro	According to one Brexit leader, the full benefits of leaving will take at least 50 years to appear. The people living in the UK for the next 50 years will therefore not realise that leaving the EU is in their interests.
according to one brexit leader, the full benefits of leaving will take at least 50 years to appear. the people living in the uk for the next 50 years will therefore not realise that leaving the eu is in their interests.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.1.1.	According to one Brexit leader, the full benefits of leaving will take at least 50 years to appear. The people living in the UK for the next 50 years will therefore not realise that leaving the EU is in their interests.	con	
the predictions of these academics have not taken into account the probability that individual opinions on being part of the eu will change over time and as people become older, and therefore their predictions are interesting but extremely unreliable.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.	The predictions of these academics have not taken into account the probability that individual opinions on being part of the EU will change over time and as people become older, and therefore their predictions are interesting but extremely unreliable.	pro	As people age they become more right wing, and Conservative voters were more likely to vote Leave than Labour voters. This was not taken into account by the academics' demography-based predictions.	Older people were more likely to vote for Brexit, and if it is true that people become more likely to support Brexit as they age then the academics' predictions will be inaccurate.	The population is getting older because we are living longer.	Older voters are on average wiser than the youngest voters, and their views are less prone to fluctuation. As the youngest voters get wiser it is therefore reasonable to assume that a proportion of them will change their views to align more closely to the prevailing wisdom amongst older voters.
as people age they become more right wing, and conservative voters were more likely to vote leave than labour voters. this was not taken into account by the academics' demography-based predictions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.	As people age they become more right wing, and Conservative voters were more likely to vote Leave than Labour voters. This was not taken into account by the academics' demography-based predictions.	pro	A person's age is not the determining factor in deciding voting preferences; the generation one grew up is important as well.	A long term study tracked voting choices of several thousand people over their lifetime, and found a 0.32% - 0.38% increase in Conservative voters per year.
a person's age is not the determining factor in deciding voting preferences; the generation one grew up is important as well.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.1.	A person's age is not the determining factor in deciding voting preferences; the generation one grew up is important as well.	con	The current older generation may vote conservative due to lower education levels, which will not be the case when current young generation becomes old. Younger generations are more likely to have been to university (35% of 30-year-olds have a degree, compared with 10% of 70-year-olds, and higher education tends to make people more socially liberal. As the current young generation ages, they will therefore not be educationally equivalent/follow the same voting patterns as the current old.	The effect of aging on party affiliation as distinct from generational factors has been known for some time.	"It has not always been the case that younger generations are more Left-wing", according to a United States PEW Research study showing that whilst in 2014 age correlated with right-wing voting, the opposite was true in 1994.	Studies suggest that the events that happen fairly early on in life set basic outlooks and orientations that affect how people vote for the rest of their lives. Examples from PEW, Bennington College, and Columbia University are discussed in this article.
the current older generation may vote conservative due to lower education levels, which will not be the case when current young generation becomes old. younger generations are more likely to have been to university (35% of 30-year-olds have a degree, compared with 10% of 70-year-olds, and higher education tends to make people more socially liberal. as the current young generation ages, they will therefore not be educationally equivalent/follow the same voting patterns as the current old.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.1.1.	The current older generation may vote conservative due to lower education levels, which will not be the case when current young generation becomes old. Younger generations are more likely to have been to university (35% of 30-year-olds have a degree, compared with 10% of 70-year-olds, and higher education tends to make people more socially liberal. As the current young generation ages, they will therefore not be educationally equivalent/follow the same voting patterns as the current old.	con	
the effect of aging on party affiliation as distinct from generational factors has been known for some time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.1.2.	The effect of aging on party affiliation as distinct from generational factors has been known for some time.	pro	
"it has not always been the case that younger generations are more left-wing", according to a united states pew research study showing that whilst in 2014 age correlated with right-wing voting, the opposite was true in 1994.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.1.3.	"It has not always been the case that younger generations are more Left-wing", according to a United States PEW Research study showing that whilst in 2014 age correlated with right-wing voting, the opposite was true in 1994.	con	
studies suggest that the events that happen fairly early on in life set basic outlooks and orientations that affect how people vote for the rest of their lives. examples from pew, bennington college, and columbia university are discussed in this article.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.1.4.	Studies suggest that the events that happen fairly early on in life set basic outlooks and orientations that affect how people vote for the rest of their lives. Examples from PEW, Bennington College, and Columbia University are discussed in this article.	con	
a long term study tracked voting choices of several thousand people over their lifetime, and found a 0.32% - 0.38% increase in conservative voters per year.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.1.2.	A long term study tracked voting choices of several thousand people over their lifetime, and found a 0.32% - 0.38% increase in Conservative voters per year.	pro	
older people were more likely to vote for brexit, and if it is true that people become more likely to support brexit as they age then the academics' predictions will be inaccurate.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.2.	Older people were more likely to vote for Brexit, and if it is true that people become more likely to support Brexit as they age then the academics' predictions will be inaccurate.	pro	
the population is getting older because we are living longer.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.3.	The population is getting older because we are living longer.	pro	
older voters are on average wiser than the youngest voters, and their views are less prone to fluctuation. as the youngest voters get wiser it is therefore reasonable to assume that a proportion of them will change their views to align more closely to the prevailing wisdom amongst older voters.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.4.	Older voters are on average wiser than the youngest voters, and their views are less prone to fluctuation. As the youngest voters get wiser it is therefore reasonable to assume that a proportion of them will change their views to align more closely to the prevailing wisdom amongst older voters.	pro	While life-experience increases with age, people's IQ start decreasing by the age of 60, hampering good judgement and application of their knowledge.	A university of Texas study found that wisdom increases with age, especially for longer term strategic decisions which took future stages into account. They found that younger adults were better when only the immediate rewards needed to be considered. They suggested a biological cause of younger adults using their still strong ventral striatum, compared to older people who are forced to compensate by using their prefrontal cortices as their ventral striatum degrades.
while life-experience increases with age, people's iq start decreasing by the age of 60, hampering good judgement and application of their knowledge.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.4.1.	While life-experience increases with age, people's IQ start decreasing by the age of 60, hampering good judgement and application of their knowledge.	con	The decrease in some measures of IQ happens after people tend to become fixed in their political opinions. Therefore the opinions of older generations are representative of the peak of their raw IQ-based capabilities.
the decrease in some measures of iq happens after people tend to become fixed in their political opinions. therefore the opinions of older generations are representative of the peak of their raw iq-based capabilities.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.4.1.1.	The decrease in some measures of IQ happens after people tend to become fixed in their political opinions. Therefore the opinions of older generations are representative of the peak of their raw IQ-based capabilities.	pro	
a university of texas study found that wisdom increases with age, especially for longer term strategic decisions which took future stages into account. they found that younger adults were better when only the immediate rewards needed to be considered. they suggested a biological cause of younger adults using their still strong ventral striatum, compared to older people who are forced to compensate by using their prefrontal cortices as their ventral striatum degrades.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.1.2.4.2.	A university of Texas study found that wisdom increases with age, especially for longer term strategic decisions which took future stages into account. They found that younger adults were better when only the immediate rewards needed to be considered. They suggested a biological cause of younger adults using their still strong ventral striatum, compared to older people who are forced to compensate by using their prefrontal cortices as their ventral striatum degrades.	pro	
a political group funded by george soros that wants to overturn the referendum result has alleged that there are more than 100 constituencies that voted for brexit but now want to remain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.2.	A political group funded by George Soros that wants to overturn the referendum result has alleged that there are more than 100 constituencies that voted for Brexit but now want to Remain.	con	Both of the groups that funded this study have been funded by George Soros, who has explicitly stated his intention to reverse Brexit. The bias of the funding source together with clear methodological errors renders the results unreliable.	This poll seeks to analyse all 600+ constituencies on the basis of a survey of just 15,000 people. This means an average sample size of just 25 people per constituency. The mean constituency size is ~70,000, which means the margin of error for each constituency of 20%. Given the difference between Leave and Remain is far less than this in most constituencies, the headline result of this polling data of 100 constituencies switching is, statistically speaking, invalid.
both of the groups that funded this study have been funded by george soros, who has explicitly stated his intention to reverse brexit. the bias of the funding source together with clear methodological errors renders the results unreliable.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.2.1.	Both of the groups that funded this study have been funded by George Soros, who has explicitly stated his intention to reverse Brexit. The bias of the funding source together with clear methodological errors renders the results unreliable.	pro	
this poll seeks to analyse all 600+ constituencies on the basis of a survey of just 15,000 people. this means an average sample size of just 25 people per constituency. the mean constituency size is ~70,000, which means the margin of error for each constituency of 20%. given the difference between leave and remain is far less than this in most constituencies, the headline result of this polling data of 100 constituencies switching is, statistically speaking, invalid.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.2.2.	This poll seeks to analyse all 600+ constituencies on the basis of a survey of just 15,000 people. This means an average sample size of just 25 people per constituency. The mean constituency size is ~70,000, which means the margin of error for each constituency of 20%. Given the difference between Leave and Remain is far less than this in most constituencies, the headline result of this polling data of 100 constituencies switching is, statistically speaking, invalid.	pro	
current polls show at most a few percent more votes for remaining in the eu. as polls are not fully reliable especially by one or two percentage points, they currently only show that public opinion is still pretty evenly split.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.3.	Current polls show at most a few percent more votes for remaining in the EU. As Polls are not fully reliable especially by one or two percentage points, they currently only show that public opinion is still pretty evenly split.	pro	
yougov polling found that while slightly more people now think brexit was the wrong decision, a majority of people still think they should continue with brexit in some form (a softer brexit), with only 13% saying brexit should be abandoned completely.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.4.	YouGov polling found that while slightly more people now think Brexit was the wrong decision, a majority of people still think they should continue with Brexit in some form (a softer Brexit), with only 13% saying Brexit should be abandoned completely.	pro	
combining all early 2018 polls gives an average (once the don’t knows are left to one side) of 48.5% for leave, and 51.5% for remain, according to whatukthinks.org.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.5.	Combining all early 2018 polls gives an average (once the Don’t Knows are left to one side) of 48.5% for leave, and 51.5% for remain, according to whatUKThinks.org.	con	
the majority of polls before the eu referendum also suggested the uk would vote to stay in the eu. there is no evidence that the polling methodology is now more accurate on this question. polls are therefore not a reliable indicator of voting behaviour on this issue.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.1.6.	The majority of polls before the EU referendum also suggested the UK would vote to stay in the EU. There is no evidence that the polling methodology is now more accurate on this question. Polls are therefore not a reliable indicator of voting behaviour on this issue.	pro	
young voters who were not eligible to vote during the 2016 referendum but are eligible now overwhelmingly support remain. carrying on without their consent would be undemocratic.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.2.	Young voters who were not eligible to vote during the 2016 referendum but are eligible now overwhelmingly support Remain. Carrying on without their consent would be undemocratic.	con	Many people were denied a vote in the referendum; this was profoundly undemocratic.	Approximately 1.5 million young people (16-17), who polled overwhelmingly in favour of staying in the EU, were not allowed to vote.
in democracies, voters should be able to change their mind if new information comes to light.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.	In democracies, voters should be able to change their mind if new information comes to light.	con	It is not logical to stick to a decision without any reassessment of that decision if the situation changes. This is analogous to driving, where if you choose to turn right, then see a wall, but carry on going because the decision has been made. As negotiations have progressed, and the reality of the impact has begun to emerge, maybe we can now see the wall in front of us. This should at least mean that there is an opportunity to decide again.	While a democracy is free to change its mind, officials should not have referendum after referendum until they get the results that they want.	The consensus at time of referendum was mildly in favour of Brexit. Current polling suggests the public are mildly in favour of remaining. Democratic will is based on a country's public's current preferences, not on their past preferences.
it is not logical to stick to a decision without any reassessment of that decision if the situation changes. this is analogous to driving, where if you choose to turn right, then see a wall, but carry on going because the decision has been made. as negotiations have progressed, and the reality of the impact has begun to emerge, maybe we can now see the wall in front of us. this should at least mean that there is an opportunity to decide again.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.1.	It is not logical to stick to a decision without any reassessment of that decision if the situation changes. This is analogous to driving, where if you choose to turn right, then see a wall, but carry on going because the decision has been made. As negotiations have progressed, and the reality of the impact has begun to emerge, maybe we can now see the wall in front of us. This should at least mean that there is an opportunity to decide again.	con	The negative speculation about what might happen if x or y is merely a continuation of what started before the referendum with the same motivations. The lack of accuracy in past forecasting demonstrates that we'll not know how the economy will be affected until after the verdict of the first vote has been properly implemented.
the negative speculation about what might happen if x or y is merely a continuation of what started before the referendum with the same motivations. the lack of accuracy in past forecasting demonstrates that we'll not know how the economy will be affected until after the verdict of the first vote has been properly implemented.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.1.1.	The negative speculation about what might happen if x or y is merely a continuation of what started before the referendum with the same motivations. The lack of accuracy in past forecasting demonstrates that we'll not know how the economy will be affected until after the verdict of the first vote has been properly implemented.	pro	
while a democracy is free to change its mind, officials should not have referendum after referendum until they get the results that they want.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.2.	While a democracy is free to change its mind, officials should not have referendum after referendum until they get the results that they want.	pro	This is irrelevant to the proposition. The proposition is about which outcome is preferable, not which means of decision making. The proposition is, for instance, compatible with the stance that the House of Commons should vote to revoke article 50 without a referendum.	Results of referenda are not random. It is determined by the will of people. Therefore people can keep voting the same way unless something changed their mind.
this is irrelevant to the proposition. the proposition is about which outcome is preferable, not which means of decision making. the proposition is, for instance, compatible with the stance that the house of commons should vote to revoke article 50 without a referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.2.1.	This is irrelevant to the proposition. The proposition is about which outcome is preferable, not which means of decision making. The proposition is, for instance, compatible with the stance that the House of Commons should vote to revoke article 50 without a referendum.	con	
results of referenda are not random. it is determined by the will of people. therefore people can keep voting the same way unless something changed their mind.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.2.2.	Results of referenda are not random. It is determined by the will of people. Therefore people can keep voting the same way unless something changed their mind.	con	"Voter fatigue" is a known phenomenon that occurs when people are asked to vote too often, their resolutions are not implemented, or they are otherwise disengaged. Even if a second referendum were won by remain, that may not indicate that minds were changed so much as that leave voters got disheartened and gave up on expressing an opinion that they see the political establishment as ignoring.	Public opinion has remained split, within the margin of error of the previous result.
"voter fatigue" is a known phenomenon that occurs when people are asked to vote too often, their resolutions are not implemented, or they are otherwise disengaged. even if a second referendum were won by remain, that may not indicate that minds were changed so much as that leave voters got disheartened and gave up on expressing an opinion that they see the political establishment as ignoring.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.2.2.1.	"Voter fatigue" is a known phenomenon that occurs when people are asked to vote too often, their resolutions are not implemented, or they are otherwise disengaged. Even if a second referendum were won by remain, that may not indicate that minds were changed so much as that leave voters got disheartened and gave up on expressing an opinion that they see the political establishment as ignoring.	pro	
public opinion has remained split, within the margin of error of the previous result.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.2.2.2.	Public opinion has remained split, within the margin of error of the previous result.	con	
the consensus at time of referendum was mildly in favour of brexit. current polling suggests the public are mildly in favour of remaining. democratic will is based on a country's public's current preferences, not on their past preferences.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.3.	The consensus at time of referendum was mildly in favour of Brexit. Current polling suggests the public are mildly in favour of remaining. Democratic will is based on a country's public's current preferences, not on their past preferences.	con	Polling at the time of the referendum suggested that too. It was wrong.	The previous referendum was held in 1975, meaning that democratic will was based on past preferences for 41 years. It hasn't even been 4 years since June 2016.
polling at the time of the referendum suggested that too. it was wrong.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.3.1.	Polling at the time of the referendum suggested that too. It was wrong.	pro	
the previous referendum was held in 1975, meaning that democratic will was based on past preferences for 41 years. it hasn't even been 4 years since june 2016.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.3.2.	The previous referendum was held in 1975, meaning that democratic will was based on past preferences for 41 years. It hasn't even been 4 years since June 2016.	pro	There could have been a referendum at any point during that time.	The need for further voting should be based on a change in public opinion, not on any arbitrary length of time.
there could have been a referendum at any point during that time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.3.2.1.	There could have been a referendum at any point during that time.	con	
the need for further voting should be based on a change in public opinion, not on any arbitrary length of time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.11.3.3.2.2.	The need for further voting should be based on a change in public opinion, not on any arbitrary length of time.	con	
the eu referendum was not carried out in the spirit of open and fair democracy, which means that the result is unlikely to be a true reflection of democratic will.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.	The EU referendum was not carried out in the spirit of open and fair democracy, which means that the result is unlikely to be a true reflection of democratic will.	con	Various Leave campaign groups broke electoral law during the referendum.	There were a number of lies told by the leave campaign. This means people may have made the decision to leave on incomplete or incorrect information.
various leave campaign groups broke electoral law during the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.	Various Leave campaign groups broke electoral law during the referendum.	con	Vote Leave have been proven to have broken the law.	Leave.EU was fined £70,000 by the Electoral Commission for incorrectly reporting what it spent at the EU referendum, founder of BeLeave was fined £20,000 for criminal offences, and investigations by the metropolitan police and the National Crime Agency are ongoing against Vote Leave.	Groups such as the UK in EU Challenge claimed that these actions were "enough to declare the Referendum result null and void".	Remain spent £19 million, Leave £13 million. It is unrealistic to suggest that Leave won because they ineligibly spent more money.
vote leave have been proven to have broken the law.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.1.	Vote Leave have been proven to have broken the law.	con	
leave.eu was fined £70,000 by the electoral commission for incorrectly reporting what it spent at the eu referendum, founder of beleave was fined £20,000 for criminal offences, and investigations by the metropolitan police and the national crime agency are ongoing against vote leave.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.2.	Leave.EU was fined £70,000 by the Electoral Commission for incorrectly reporting what it spent at the EU referendum, founder of BeLeave was fined £20,000 for criminal offences, and investigations by the metropolitan police and the National Crime Agency are ongoing against Vote Leave.	con	
groups such as the uk in eu challenge claimed that these actions were "enough to declare the referendum result null and void".	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.3.	Groups such as the UK in EU Challenge claimed that these actions were "enough to declare the Referendum result null and void".	con	The court of appeals found that the law that would enable the recall of a vote due to wrongdoing (Representation of the People Act 1983) does not apply because the referendum was non-binding.
the court of appeals found that the law that would enable the recall of a vote due to wrongdoing (representation of the people act 1983) does not apply because the referendum was non-binding.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.3.1.	The court of appeals found that the law that would enable the recall of a vote due to wrongdoing (Representation of the People Act 1983) does not apply because the referendum was non-binding.	pro	Then the result can be declared null and void without needing any further governance.
then the result can be declared null and void without needing any further governance.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.3.1.1.	Then the result can be declared null and void without needing any further governance.	pro	
remain spent £19 million, leave £13 million. it is unrealistic to suggest that leave won because they ineligibly spent more money.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.4.	Remain spent £19 million, Leave £13 million. It is unrealistic to suggest that Leave won because they ineligibly spent more money.	pro	The Government sent their their remain mailout just before the official campaign start and so the electoral commission statistics do not even include that £9 million. This alone covers more than the total Vote.Leave spend, and over ten times greater than the amount they spent through BeLeave and were fined for.
the government sent their their remain mailout just before the official campaign start and so the electoral commission statistics do not even include that £9 million. this alone covers more than the total vote.leave spend, and over ten times greater than the amount they spent through beleave and were fined for.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.1.4.1.	The Government sent their their remain mailout just before the official campaign start and so the electoral commission statistics do not even include that £9 million. This alone covers more than the total Vote.Leave spend, and over ten times greater than the amount they spent through BeLeave and were fined for.	pro	
there were a number of lies told by the leave campaign. this means people may have made the decision to leave on incomplete or incorrect information.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.	There were a number of lies told by the leave campaign. This means people may have made the decision to leave on incomplete or incorrect information.	con	Vote Leave said "The UK has been outvoted every single time it has voted against EU laws" but this is untrue - UK ministers were on the losing side only 2% of the time.	For years before the referendum lies and anti-EU propaganda had been swallowed by a large proportion of the British public. Most 'myths' were blatantly wrong. Check them all out here.	Lies have been part and parcel of electoral politics since it existed. It is the responsibility of people to verify the information they base their votes on.	People can choose to vote even when they have no information, let alone incomplete information. Democracy allows them to make that choice.	Lies were told on both sides, for example few of the dire economic predictions of the effect of a leave vote have materialised.	Both sides chose to focus on values, not the details of Britain's EU membership. Due to the Leave campaign's focus on immigration policy, immigration became the defining issue of the referendum. This means many people likely made their decision based on the Leave campaign's promises to cut immigration, rather than considering the specifics of EU policy and what leaving actually entailed.
vote leave said "the uk has been outvoted every single time it has voted against eu laws" but this is untrue - uk ministers were on the losing side only 2% of the time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.1.	Vote Leave said "The UK has been outvoted every single time it has voted against EU laws" but this is untrue - UK ministers were on the losing side only 2% of the time.	con	
for years before the referendum lies and anti-eu propaganda had been swallowed by a large proportion of the british public. most 'myths' were blatantly wrong. check them all out here.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.2.	For years before the referendum lies and anti-EU propaganda had been swallowed by a large proportion of the British public. Most 'myths' were blatantly wrong. Check them all out here.	con	
lies have been part and parcel of electoral politics since it existed. it is the responsibility of people to verify the information they base their votes on.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.3.	Lies have been part and parcel of electoral politics since it existed. It is the responsibility of people to verify the information they base their votes on.	pro	
people can choose to vote even when they have no information, let alone incomplete information. democracy allows them to make that choice.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.4.	People can choose to vote even when they have no information, let alone incomplete information. Democracy allows them to make that choice.	pro	Although those who are born in the UK are not required to take the test, the government sets out a minimum level of knowledge and understanding required of those claiming citizenship. People who don't have that level of understanding can still choose to vote but to do so is morally irresponsible.
although those who are born in the uk are not required to take the test, the government sets out a minimum level of knowledge and understanding required of those claiming citizenship. people who don't have that level of understanding can still choose to vote but to do so is morally irresponsible.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.4.1.	Although those who are born in the UK are not required to take the test, the government sets out a minimum level of knowledge and understanding required of those claiming citizenship. People who don't have that level of understanding can still choose to vote but to do so is morally irresponsible.	con	
lies were told on both sides, for example few of the dire economic predictions of the effect of a leave vote have materialised.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.	Lies were told on both sides, for example few of the dire economic predictions of the effect of a leave vote have materialised.	pro	The predictions of immediate impact were built around several assumptions on the actions of the government and institutions such as the Bank Of England.  For example, the BoE cut interest rates and offered banks an extra £250m to borrow. These plans were somewhat mysterious so couldn't have been accounted for in any forecasting.	The predictions of immediate impact also would have assumed that the Prime Minister would have triggered Article 50 immediately, based on his answers when directly asked.	Confirmation bias means that those on the remain side focus disproportionately on the inaccuracies of the leave side and assume they had more influence than is supported by any actual evidence. At the same time, they ignore the inaccuracies in the arguments of their own side.	Leave claimed that Brexit would result in increased prosperity. Remain claimed that Brexit would cause economic harm. With our GDP growth already down 2.1%, and forecast to go down 8% in total over the next 15 years in the event of a hard Brexit, it is clear that as far as the economy is concerned, Remain were far more accurate.	There is a big difference between lies and predictions. Lies were told to intentionally mislead the electorate in able to win votes. It could be argued that predictions were based on us leaving the EU and the Single Market. Neither has occurred yet.	A new government study shows that the UK will be worse off under Brexit in any form than staying in the EU.	The UK has not left the EU yet (as of 12th Feb 2018).	The effects of leaving will only materialise when we leave. This has not happened yet therefore the assertion that lies were told on both sides is incorrect
the predictions of immediate impact were built around several assumptions on the actions of the government and institutions such as the bank of england.  for example, the boe cut interest rates and offered banks an extra £250m to borrow. these plans were somewhat mysterious so couldn't have been accounted for in any forecasting.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.1.	The predictions of immediate impact were built around several assumptions on the actions of the government and institutions such as the Bank Of England.  For example, the BoE cut interest rates and offered banks an extra £250m to borrow. These plans were somewhat mysterious so couldn't have been accounted for in any forecasting.	con	It was obvious that the Bank of England would have taken some precautionary measures were the referendum to result in a Yes vote; at no point did the remain campaign claim that their disastrous economic predictions would only come to fruition if the Bank of England did nothing at all.
it was obvious that the bank of england would have taken some precautionary measures were the referendum to result in a yes vote; at no point did the remain campaign claim that their disastrous economic predictions would only come to fruition if the bank of england did nothing at all.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.1.1.	It was obvious that the Bank of England would have taken some precautionary measures were the referendum to result in a Yes vote; at no point did the remain campaign claim that their disastrous economic predictions would only come to fruition if the Bank of England did nothing at all.	pro	
the predictions of immediate impact also would have assumed that the prime minister would have triggered article 50 immediately, based on his answers when directly asked.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.2.	The predictions of immediate impact also would have assumed that the Prime Minister would have triggered Article 50 immediately, based on his answers when directly asked.	con	
confirmation bias means that those on the remain side focus disproportionately on the inaccuracies of the leave side and assume they had more influence than is supported by any actual evidence. at the same time, they ignore the inaccuracies in the arguments of their own side.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.3.	Confirmation bias means that those on the remain side focus disproportionately on the inaccuracies of the leave side and assume they had more influence than is supported by any actual evidence. At the same time, they ignore the inaccuracies in the arguments of their own side.	pro	
leave claimed that brexit would result in increased prosperity. remain claimed that brexit would cause economic harm. with our gdp growth already down 2.1%, and forecast to go down 8% in total over the next 15 years in the event of a hard brexit, it is clear that as far as the economy is concerned, remain were far more accurate.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.4.	Leave claimed that Brexit would result in increased prosperity. Remain claimed that Brexit would cause economic harm. With our GDP growth already down 2.1%, and forecast to go down 8% in total over the next 15 years in the event of a hard Brexit, it is clear that as far as the economy is concerned, Remain were far more accurate.	con	
there is a big difference between lies and predictions. lies were told to intentionally mislead the electorate in able to win votes. it could be argued that predictions were based on us leaving the eu and the single market. neither has occurred yet.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.5.	There is a big difference between lies and predictions. Lies were told to intentionally mislead the electorate in able to win votes. It could be argued that predictions were based on us leaving the EU and the Single Market. Neither has occurred yet.	con	
a new government study shows that the uk will be worse off under brexit in any form than staying in the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.6.	A new government study shows that the UK will be worse off under Brexit in any form than staying in the EU.	con	
the uk has not left the eu yet (as of 12th feb 2018).	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.7.	The UK has not left the EU yet (as of 12th Feb 2018).	con	
the effects of leaving will only materialise when we leave. this has not happened yet therefore the assertion that lies were told on both sides is incorrect	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.12.2.5.8.	The effects of leaving will only materialise when we leave. This has not happened yet therefore the assertion that lies were told on both sides is incorrect	con	
even though the uk voted to leave the eu, it is unclear what the democratic will is with regards to how this is done.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.	Even though the UK voted to leave the EU, it is unclear what the democratic will is with regards to how this is done.	con	When the British people decided by referendum on 23 June 2016 to leave the EU, the decision was not conditional on "hard" or "easy" Brexit.	The "instructions" from the electorate were far from specific, that is the central problem the UK finds itself dealing with - there is and never was any clear understanding of what version of leave to pursue.	The referendum was badly drafted, because it did not distinguish between vastly different versions of Brexit. Leave voters themselves do not agree which version they want. If and when the Government eventually decides what Brexit it wants, the majority of the public may be against it.
when the british people decided by referendum on 23 june 2016 to leave the eu, the decision was not conditional on "hard" or "easy" brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.1.	When the British people decided by referendum on 23 June 2016 to leave the EU, the decision was not conditional on "hard" or "easy" Brexit.	pro	The British people did not *decide* to leave the EU, they merely suggested it, in the certain knowledge that Parliament has a clear duty to consider all the relevant facts and then make the decision themselves...	This very statement accepts and proves that what is currently on offer / happening in the Brexit process could not have been foreseen by the general public, and as such should be put to another vote.	The option for what kind of Brexit people wanted was not given as an option on the ballot. Neither was the option for "Leave the EU, the single market, Euroatom and the Bill of human rights" but that all seems to have been inferred.
the british people did not *decide* to leave the eu, they merely suggested it, in the certain knowledge that parliament has a clear duty to consider all the relevant facts and then make the decision themselves...	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.1.1.	The British people did not *decide* to leave the EU, they merely suggested it, in the certain knowledge that Parliament has a clear duty to consider all the relevant facts and then make the decision themselves...	con	
this very statement accepts and proves that what is currently on offer / happening in the brexit process could not have been foreseen by the general public, and as such should be put to another vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.1.2.	This very statement accepts and proves that what is currently on offer / happening in the Brexit process could not have been foreseen by the general public, and as such should be put to another vote.	con	
the option for what kind of brexit people wanted was not given as an option on the ballot. neither was the option for "leave the eu, the single market, euroatom and the bill of human rights" but that all seems to have been inferred.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.1.3.	The option for what kind of Brexit people wanted was not given as an option on the ballot. Neither was the option for "Leave the EU, the single market, Euroatom and the Bill of human rights" but that all seems to have been inferred.	con	
the "instructions" from the electorate were far from specific, that is the central problem the uk finds itself dealing with - there is and never was any clear understanding of what version of leave to pursue.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.	The "instructions" from the electorate were far from specific, that is the central problem the UK finds itself dealing with - there is and never was any clear understanding of what version of leave to pursue.	con	The WTO governed trade relationship with the EU in the event of no deal would not represent an outcome that the electorate voted for.	Polls indicate that public opinion now supports remaining in the EU.	The referendum was badly drafted, because it did not distinguish between vastly different versions of Brexit. Leave voters themselves do not agree which version they want. If and when the Government eventually decides what Brexit it wants, the majority of the public may be against it.
the wto governed trade relationship with the eu in the event of no deal would not represent an outcome that the electorate voted for.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.	The WTO governed trade relationship with the EU in the event of no deal would not represent an outcome that the electorate voted for.	con	Vote Leave - the official Brexit campaign - clearly stated that there would be a deal.  It is clear from the second paragraph ofthe "About The Campaign" section of their website, and from page 10 of the Vote Leave "Why Vote Leave" document..	Though it is not as explicit as Vote Leave, the other prominent Brexit campaign group - Leave.EU - clearly states their vision that includes some kind of continued relationship with the EU, and explicitly lists Norway-plus and Canada models as options.	Vote Leave said "we will negotiate the terms of a new deal before we start any legal process to leave".	Many people voted for the Conservatives under the assumption that they would leave the EU even if it meant leaving without a deal.	WTO governed trade allows beneficial trade deals to be struck and therefore is what the electorate voted for.	WTO governed trade does not preclude a good trade deal with the EU, which definitely represents the desires of the majority.	Only about 35% of Leave voters thought leaving meant leaving the single market, as would happen with no deal.	Even Nigel Farage advocated a deal on the same basis as Norway.	The electorate knew what they were voting for and what they were voting for was the deal that the Prime Minister has come back with. If parliament does not find that deal acceptable, then they must deem that the electorate did not know what they were voting for.	The public has shown more support for a No-Deal than for remaining.
vote leave - the official brexit campaign - clearly stated that there would be a deal.  it is clear from the second paragraph ofthe "about the campaign" section of their website, and from page 10 of the vote leave "why vote leave" document..	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.1.	Vote Leave - the official Brexit campaign - clearly stated that there would be a deal.  It is clear from the second paragraph ofthe "About The Campaign" section of their website, and from page 10 of the Vote Leave "Why Vote Leave" document..	con	It is predicted that trading on WTO terms will, as a worst case scenario,  result in a less than a 2% decrease in trade with the EU which is 0.25% of GDP.
it is predicted that trading on wto terms will, as a worst case scenario,  result in a less than a 2% decrease in trade with the eu which is 0.25% of gdp.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.1.1.	It is predicted that trading on WTO terms will, as a worst case scenario,  result in a less than a 2% decrease in trade with the EU which is 0.25% of GDP.	pro	
though it is not as explicit as vote leave, the other prominent brexit campaign group - leave.eu - clearly states their vision that includes some kind of continued relationship with the eu, and explicitly lists norway-plus and canada models as options.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.2.	Though it is not as explicit as Vote Leave, the other prominent Brexit campaign group - Leave.EU - clearly states their vision that includes some kind of continued relationship with the EU, and explicitly lists Norway-plus and Canada models as options.	con	
vote leave said "we will negotiate the terms of a new deal before we start any legal process to leave".	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.3.	Vote Leave said "we will negotiate the terms of a new deal before we start any legal process to leave".	con	The full quote is "Taking back control is a careful change, not a sudden step – we will negotiate the terms of a new deal before we start any legal process to leave"
the full quote is "taking back control is a careful change, not a sudden step – we will negotiate the terms of a new deal before we start any legal process to leave"	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.3.1.	The full quote is "Taking back control is a careful change, not a sudden step – we will negotiate the terms of a new deal before we start any legal process to leave"	con	
many people voted for the conservatives under the assumption that they would leave the eu even if it meant leaving without a deal.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.	Many people voted for the Conservatives under the assumption that they would leave the EU even if it meant leaving without a deal.	pro	52 percent of voters chose parties who are against a no-deal Brexit.	The Tories lost their majority in the election.	The manifesto says "Theresa May's Conservatives will deliver the best possible deal for Britain as we leave the European Union delivered by a smooth, orderly brexit". It goes on to say "the government believes that no deal is better than a bad deal but we will enter the negotiations in a spirit of sincere cooperation and committed to getting the best deal for Britain." It is clear and indeed openly referred to that no deal was purely for negotiation purposes.	The 2017 election result cannot be taken as an effective endorsement of no deal, since it was a general election on a range of wider issues.	This claim simply isn't true as it conflates the 2017 general election result with the Brexit referendum.	"No deal is better than a bad deal" was used once within the manifesto, and even then within the context of a commitment to getting a good deal; that does not constitute a "mantra". If anything, the Conservative Party mantra in their 2017 manifesto was "strong and stable leadership".	The electorate clearly voted for a Conservative manifesto that clearly states "the task ahead is too great" and so brexit should be cancelled.	The Brexit Party supports a no deal Brexit, and is expected to gain over 30% of votes in the 2019 European elections. Many of these are former Conservative voters, suggesting there has always been support amongst the Conservative base for a no-deal Brexit.	There has been a core group of Tory MPs that supported a no-deal Brexit during the 2017 general election. These roughly 60 MPs were calling upon Theresa May to pursue a Hard Brexit with the EU. The fact that they got elected clearly illustrates that there are a lot of Conservatives who support a no-deal Brexit.
52 percent of voters chose parties who are against a no-deal brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.	52 percent of voters chose parties who are against a no-deal Brexit.	con	Labour, with 40% of the vote, was against a no-deal brexit.	The Liberal Democrats (7.4%), SNP (3%), and the Greens (1.6%) are all strongly against Brexit, including a No Deal.	The 2017 election result cannot be taken as an effective endorsement of no deal, since it was a general election on a range of wider issues.
labour, with 40% of the vote, was against a no-deal brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.1.	Labour, with 40% of the vote, was against a no-deal brexit.	con	Keir Starmer, the shadow secretary of state for exiting the European Union, stated the Labour Party position on a no- deal Brexit, in a speech in April "A Labour approach means rejecting no deal as a viable option"	Labours manifesto said "Labour recognises that leaving the EU with ‘no deal’ is the worst possible deal for Britain and that it would do damage to our economy and trade. We will reject ‘no deal’ as a viable option and if needs be negotiate transitional arrangements to avoid a ‘cliff-edge’ for the UK economy."
keir starmer, the shadow secretary of state for exiting the european union, stated the labour party position on a no- deal brexit, in a speech in april "a labour approach means rejecting no deal as a viable option"	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.1.1.	Keir Starmer, the shadow secretary of state for exiting the European Union, stated the Labour Party position on a no- deal Brexit, in a speech in April "A Labour approach means rejecting no deal as a viable option"	con	
labours manifesto said "labour recognises that leaving the eu with ‘no deal’ is the worst possible deal for britain and that it would do damage to our economy and trade. we will reject ‘no deal’ as a viable option and if needs be negotiate transitional arrangements to avoid a ‘cliff-edge’ for the uk economy."	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.1.2.	Labours manifesto said "Labour recognises that leaving the EU with ‘no deal’ is the worst possible deal for Britain and that it would do damage to our economy and trade. We will reject ‘no deal’ as a viable option and if needs be negotiate transitional arrangements to avoid a ‘cliff-edge’ for the UK economy."	con	
the liberal democrats (7.4%), snp (3%), and the greens (1.6%) are all strongly against brexit, including a no deal.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.2.	The Liberal Democrats (7.4%), SNP (3%), and the Greens (1.6%) are all strongly against Brexit, including a No Deal.	con	
the 2017 election result cannot be taken as an effective endorsement of no deal, since it was a general election on a range of wider issues.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.3.	The 2017 election result cannot be taken as an effective endorsement of no deal, since it was a general election on a range of wider issues.	pro	Two major terrorist attacks took place during the election campaign, with parties arguing about the best way to prevent such events. This discussion would inevitably have effected some people's votes.	Social care became a major election issue after the Conservative Party's manifesto included new proposals, which were subsequently altered after criticism.	Polling shows that only 21% consider Brexit the main reason they voted for their Conservative MP.	Polling shows that 65% of labour voters main reason for voting was not Brexit related. This includes being Anti-Tory, liking Corbyn, and the NHS.
two major terrorist attacks took place during the election campaign, with parties arguing about the best way to prevent such events. this discussion would inevitably have effected some people's votes.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.3.1.	Two major terrorist attacks took place during the election campaign, with parties arguing about the best way to prevent such events. This discussion would inevitably have effected some people's votes.	pro	
social care became a major election issue after the conservative party's manifesto included new proposals, which were subsequently altered after criticism.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.3.2.	Social care became a major election issue after the Conservative Party's manifesto included new proposals, which were subsequently altered after criticism.	pro	
polling shows that only 21% consider brexit the main reason they voted for their conservative mp.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.3.3.	Polling shows that only 21% consider Brexit the main reason they voted for their Conservative MP.	pro	
polling shows that 65% of labour voters main reason for voting was not brexit related. this includes being anti-tory, liking corbyn, and the nhs.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.1.3.4.	Polling shows that 65% of labour voters main reason for voting was not Brexit related. This includes being Anti-Tory, liking Corbyn, and the NHS.	pro	
the tories lost their majority in the election.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.2.	The Tories lost their majority in the election.	con	
the manifesto says "theresa may's conservatives will deliver the best possible deal for britain as we leave the european union delivered by a smooth, orderly brexit". it goes on to say "the government believes that no deal is better than a bad deal but we will enter the negotiations in a spirit of sincere cooperation and committed to getting the best deal for britain." it is clear and indeed openly referred to that no deal was purely for negotiation purposes.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.3.	The manifesto says "Theresa May's Conservatives will deliver the best possible deal for Britain as we leave the European Union delivered by a smooth, orderly brexit". It goes on to say "the government believes that no deal is better than a bad deal but we will enter the negotiations in a spirit of sincere cooperation and committed to getting the best deal for Britain." It is clear and indeed openly referred to that no deal was purely for negotiation purposes.	con	
this claim simply isn't true as it conflates the 2017 general election result with the brexit referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.5.	This claim simply isn't true as it conflates the 2017 general election result with the Brexit referendum.	con	
"no deal is better than a bad deal" was used once within the manifesto, and even then within the context of a commitment to getting a good deal; that does not constitute a "mantra". if anything, the conservative party mantra in their 2017 manifesto was "strong and stable leadership".	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.6.	"No deal is better than a bad deal" was used once within the manifesto, and even then within the context of a commitment to getting a good deal; that does not constitute a "mantra". If anything, the Conservative Party mantra in their 2017 manifesto was "strong and stable leadership".	con	As the Conservatives were unable to deliver on their main manifesto promise, Strong and Stable leadership, we have no reason to expect them to deliver on any of their manifesto promises.
as the conservatives were unable to deliver on their main manifesto promise, strong and stable leadership, we have no reason to expect them to deliver on any of their manifesto promises.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.6.1.	As the Conservatives were unable to deliver on their main manifesto promise, Strong and Stable leadership, we have no reason to expect them to deliver on any of their manifesto promises.	con	
the electorate clearly voted for a conservative manifesto that clearly states "the task ahead is too great" and so brexit should be cancelled.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.7.	The electorate clearly voted for a Conservative manifesto that clearly states "the task ahead is too great" and so brexit should be cancelled.	con	
the brexit party supports a no deal brexit, and is expected to gain over 30% of votes in the 2019 european elections. many of these are former conservative voters, suggesting there has always been support amongst the conservative base for a no-deal brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.8.	The Brexit Party supports a no deal Brexit, and is expected to gain over 30% of votes in the 2019 European elections. Many of these are former Conservative voters, suggesting there has always been support amongst the Conservative base for a no-deal Brexit.	pro	As there was no support for a No Deal Brexit before the referendum, it rather suggests that the Brexit party has exploited public dissatisfaction with the handling of the Brexit process to push for an extremist position that simply wasn't part of the discussion before the referendum.
as there was no support for a no deal brexit before the referendum, it rather suggests that the brexit party has exploited public dissatisfaction with the handling of the brexit process to push for an extremist position that simply wasn't part of the discussion before the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.8.1.	As there was no support for a No Deal Brexit before the referendum, it rather suggests that the Brexit party has exploited public dissatisfaction with the handling of the Brexit process to push for an extremist position that simply wasn't part of the discussion before the referendum.	con	
there has been a core group of tory mps that supported a no-deal brexit during the 2017 general election. these roughly 60 mps were calling upon theresa may to pursue a hard brexit with the eu. the fact that they got elected clearly illustrates that there are a lot of conservatives who support a no-deal brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.4.9.	There has been a core group of Tory MPs that supported a no-deal Brexit during the 2017 general election. These roughly 60 MPs were calling upon Theresa May to pursue a Hard Brexit with the EU. The fact that they got elected clearly illustrates that there are a lot of Conservatives who support a no-deal Brexit.	pro	
wto governed trade allows beneficial trade deals to be struck and therefore is what the electorate voted for.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.5.	WTO governed trade allows beneficial trade deals to be struck and therefore is what the electorate voted for.	pro	
wto governed trade does not preclude a good trade deal with the eu, which definitely represents the desires of the majority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.6.	WTO governed trade does not preclude a good trade deal with the EU, which definitely represents the desires of the majority.	pro	
only about 35% of leave voters thought leaving meant leaving the single market, as would happen with no deal.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.7.	Only about 35% of Leave voters thought leaving meant leaving the single market, as would happen with no deal.	con	
even nigel farage advocated a deal on the same basis as norway.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.8.	Even Nigel Farage advocated a deal on the same basis as Norway.	con	
the electorate knew what they were voting for and what they were voting for was the deal that the prime minister has come back with. if parliament does not find that deal acceptable, then they must deem that the electorate did not know what they were voting for.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.9.	The electorate knew what they were voting for and what they were voting for was the deal that the Prime Minister has come back with. If parliament does not find that deal acceptable, then they must deem that the electorate did not know what they were voting for.	con	
the public has shown more support for a no-deal than for remaining.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.	The public has shown more support for a No-Deal than for remaining.	pro	600 constituencies support Remain, 2 support a deal, and 30 support no-deal, according to a December 2018 YouGov poll.	46% of adults are confident that the UK will ultimately be OK, after brief uncertainty, if it leaves the EU without a deal, according to a March 2019 poll by the Telegraph.	When asked "In the event of Parliament voting down the Brexit deal that the Government negotiates with the European Union, what do you think should happen next?" No Deal has consistently been the top choice in a series of 9 polls (2018/2019).	45% of the public agreed when asked if we should leave and trade on “WTO rules” instead of delaying Brexit, with only 34% disagreeing, according to a Comres poll in April 2019.	When given the choice of leaving with no deal or remaining, no deal is the most popular choice.	The public does not support a no deal when all other options are kept on the table.	In the European elections appoximately 40.4% of votes went to explicitly Pro-Remain parties (LD, Green, SNP, Plaid, Change) while only 34.9% went to explicit No-Deal parties (Brexit, UKIP). The remaining 23.2% went to parties currently trying to offer some form of compromise (Labour, Conservative).
600 constituencies support remain, 2 support a deal, and 30 support no-deal, according to a december 2018 yougov poll.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.1.	600 constituencies support Remain, 2 support a deal, and 30 support no-deal, according to a December 2018 YouGov poll.	con	
46% of adults are confident that the uk will ultimately be ok, after brief uncertainty, if it leaves the eu without a deal, according to a march 2019 poll by the telegraph.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.	46% of adults are confident that the UK will ultimately be OK, after brief uncertainty, if it leaves the EU without a deal, according to a March 2019 poll by the Telegraph.	pro	If the UK leaves the EU, Brexit MEP Lucy Harris believes it "will" rebound economically in about 30 years.	“Ultimately” is too vague a term. There’s no way to tell what time frame respondents had in mind: Would the average be 5 years, 25 years, 125 years? We have no way of knowing so the statistic is meaningless.	"Brief" is too vague a term. There’s no way to tell what time frame respondents had in mind.	The Telegraph does not show it's methodology. As a newspaper with a political bias for Leave, there is a strong possibility of bias or intentional misleading.
if the uk leaves the eu, brexit mep lucy harris believes it "will" rebound economically in about 30 years.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.1.	If the UK leaves the EU, Brexit MEP Lucy Harris believes it "will" rebound economically in about 30 years.	pro	Many of those who voted in the referendum will be dead in 30 years time.	There is some uncertainty regarding just how long it will take for the UK to make it back. Some Brexiteers think it will take 50 years to take advantage of Brexit, while others think it may be even longer than that.
many of those who voted in the referendum will be dead in 30 years time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.1.1.	Many of those who voted in the referendum will be dead in 30 years time.	con	
there is some uncertainty regarding just how long it will take for the uk to make it back. some brexiteers think it will take 50 years to take advantage of brexit, while others think it may be even longer than that.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.1.2.	There is some uncertainty regarding just how long it will take for the UK to make it back. Some Brexiteers think it will take 50 years to take advantage of Brexit, while others think it may be even longer than that.	con	
“ultimately” is too vague a term. there’s no way to tell what time frame respondents had in mind: would the average be 5 years, 25 years, 125 years? we have no way of knowing so the statistic is meaningless.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.2.	“Ultimately” is too vague a term. There’s no way to tell what time frame respondents had in mind: Would the average be 5 years, 25 years, 125 years? We have no way of knowing so the statistic is meaningless.	con	
"brief" is too vague a term. there’s no way to tell what time frame respondents had in mind.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.3.	"Brief" is too vague a term. There’s no way to tell what time frame respondents had in mind.	con	
the telegraph does not show it's methodology. as a newspaper with a political bias for leave, there is a strong possibility of bias or intentional misleading.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.2.4.	The Telegraph does not show it's methodology. As a newspaper with a political bias for Leave, there is a strong possibility of bias or intentional misleading.	con	
when asked "in the event of parliament voting down the brexit deal that the government negotiates with the european union, what do you think should happen next?" no deal has consistently been the top choice in a series of 9 polls (2018/2019).	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.3.	When asked "In the event of Parliament voting down the Brexit deal that the Government negotiates with the European Union, what do you think should happen next?" No Deal has consistently been the top choice in a series of 9 polls (2018/2019).	pro	The cited article shows that no-deal has consistently been supported by a plurality of fewer than 30% of the responders.	This poll has several similar options which have split the vote of people who are against a no deal. If you combine the two "second vote" options, it easily overtakes the "no deal" option.
the cited article shows that no-deal has consistently been supported by a plurality of fewer than 30% of the responders.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.3.1.	The cited article shows that no-deal has consistently been supported by a plurality of fewer than 30% of the responders.	con	
this poll has several similar options which have split the vote of people who are against a no deal. if you combine the two "second vote" options, it easily overtakes the "no deal" option.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.3.2.	This poll has several similar options which have split the vote of people who are against a no deal. If you combine the two "second vote" options, it easily overtakes the "no deal" option.	con	One of the "second vote" options is still between two variants on leave, without allowing for remaining.
one of the "second vote" options is still between two variants on leave, without allowing for remaining.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.3.2.1.	One of the "second vote" options is still between two variants on leave, without allowing for remaining.	pro	That is consistently the less popularly supported of the two, enjoying approximately 10% support. Even summing it and no deal does not reach a simple majority.
that is consistently the less popularly supported of the two, enjoying approximately 10% support. even summing it and no deal does not reach a simple majority.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.3.2.1.1.	That is consistently the less popularly supported of the two, enjoying approximately 10% support. Even summing it and no deal does not reach a simple majority.	con	
45% of the public agreed when asked if we should leave and trade on “wto rules” instead of delaying brexit, with only 34% disagreeing, according to a comres poll in april 2019.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.4.	45% of the public agreed when asked if we should leave and trade on “WTO rules” instead of delaying Brexit, with only 34% disagreeing, according to a Comres poll in April 2019.	pro	The polls methodology suffers from acquiescence bias.
the polls methodology suffers from acquiescence bias.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.4.1.	The polls methodology suffers from acquiescence bias.	con	When asked if you agree or disagree with something, you’re more likely to agree with the statement. The 45% could have been boosted by people answering “agree” when they may not have, had the question been worded more neutrally.
when asked if you agree or disagree with something, you’re more likely to agree with the statement. the 45% could have been boosted by people answering “agree” when they may not have, had the question been worded more neutrally.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.4.1.1.	When asked if you agree or disagree with something, you’re more likely to agree with the statement. The 45% could have been boosted by people answering “agree” when they may not have, had the question been worded more neutrally.	con	
when given the choice of leaving with no deal or remaining, no deal is the most popular choice.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.	When given the choice of leaving with no deal or remaining, no deal is the most popular choice.	pro	76% of conservative members party members chose 'No Deal' over remain in a ESRC survey.	YouGov polling in April 2019 found that 44% to 42% of Britons would prefer to leave with no deal if the alternative is remaining.	If we want to know the answer to a different question to that asked in the referendum and be able to action it, then we need to formally ask that question in a referendum.	In the European elections appoximately 40.4% of votes went to explicitly Pro-Remain parties (LD, Green, SNP, Plaid, Change) while only 34.9% went to explicit No-Deal parties (Brexit, UKIP). The remaining 23.2% went to parties currently trying to offer some form of compromise (Labour, Conservative).
76% of conservative members party members chose 'no deal' over remain in a esrc survey.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.1.	76% of conservative members party members chose 'No Deal' over remain in a ESRC survey.	pro	Conservative voters are a minority of the UK population.	Conservative party members are not representative of the wider population.
conservative voters are a minority of the uk population.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.1.1.	Conservative voters are a minority of the UK population.	con	
conservative party members are not representative of the wider population.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.1.2.	Conservative party members are not representative of the wider population.	con	
yougov polling in april 2019 found that 44% to 42% of britons would prefer to leave with no deal if the alternative is remaining.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.	YouGov polling in April 2019 found that 44% to 42% of Britons would prefer to leave with no deal if the alternative is remaining.	pro	This poll did not include Northern Ireland, which is more pro Remain than Great Britain.	YouGov polls consistently over-predict the pro no-deal party UKIP's success (7 out of 9 recent polls). These errors may also manifest in other no-deal related predictions.
this poll did not include northern ireland, which is more pro remain than great britain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.1.	This poll did not include Northern Ireland, which is more pro Remain than Great Britain.	con	55.8% of Northern Ireland voted remain, compared to only 48% in Great Britain.	By excluding a section of the electorate, this poll contributes towards disinformation.
55.8% of northern ireland voted remain, compared to only 48% in great britain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.1.1.	55.8% of Northern Ireland voted remain, compared to only 48% in Great Britain.	con	
by excluding a section of the electorate, this poll contributes towards disinformation.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.1.2.	By excluding a section of the electorate, this poll contributes towards disinformation.	con	Excluding Northern Ireland is the case with a lot of political polling in the UK, largely because Northern Ireland’s party system is different from the rest of the nation. This is less a purposeful disinformation campaign, and more a limitation of pre-existing political polling structures.	Disinformation is a deliberate act, but this poll openly stated where the results came from. Without attempting to hide or mislead, it is not disinformation.
excluding northern ireland is the case with a lot of political polling in the uk, largely because northern ireland’s party system is different from the rest of the nation. this is less a purposeful disinformation campaign, and more a limitation of pre-existing political polling structures.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.1.2.1.	Excluding Northern Ireland is the case with a lot of political polling in the UK, largely because Northern Ireland’s party system is different from the rest of the nation. This is less a purposeful disinformation campaign, and more a limitation of pre-existing political polling structures.	pro	
disinformation is a deliberate act, but this poll openly stated where the results came from. without attempting to hide or mislead, it is not disinformation.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.1.2.2.	Disinformation is a deliberate act, but this poll openly stated where the results came from. Without attempting to hide or mislead, it is not disinformation.	pro	
yougov polls consistently over-predict the pro no-deal party ukip's success (7 out of 9 recent polls). these errors may also manifest in other no-deal related predictions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.	YouGov polls consistently over-predict the pro no-deal party UKIP's success (7 out of 9 recent polls). These errors may also manifest in other no-deal related predictions.	con	UKIP were genuinely hard to predict, due to their volatility and over-representation in the media.	Other polling sources regularly predicted UKIP higher than YouGov did.
ukip were genuinely hard to predict, due to their volatility and over-representation in the media.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.1.	UKIP were genuinely hard to predict, due to their volatility and over-representation in the media.	pro	Potentially the largest election-time complaint to the BBC (1190 complaints) was that they gave much coverage to UKIP, or were biased in favour of the party.	UKIP have had a turbulent rise and fall, which makes them much harder to predict than mainstream parties. They became the first party in 100 years that was not the Tories or Labour to win a nationwide election in 2014, but are virtually dead in 2018 with 75% fewer candidates.	UKIP are over represented in the media because of over-optimistic polling.
potentially the largest election-time complaint to the bbc (1190 complaints) was that they gave much coverage to ukip, or were biased in favour of the party.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.1.1.	Potentially the largest election-time complaint to the BBC (1190 complaints) was that they gave much coverage to UKIP, or were biased in favour of the party.	pro	
ukip have had a turbulent rise and fall, which makes them much harder to predict than mainstream parties. they became the first party in 100 years that was not the tories or labour to win a nationwide election in 2014, but are virtually dead in 2018 with 75% fewer candidates.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.1.2.	UKIP have had a turbulent rise and fall, which makes them much harder to predict than mainstream parties. They became the first party in 100 years that was not the Tories or Labour to win a nationwide election in 2014, but are virtually dead in 2018 with 75% fewer candidates.	pro	
ukip are over represented in the media because of over-optimistic polling.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.1.3.	UKIP are over represented in the media because of over-optimistic polling.	pro	
other polling sources regularly predicted ukip higher than yougov did.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.2.	Other polling sources regularly predicted UKIP higher than YouGov did.	pro	In the 2009 EU Elections, the 2014 EU Elections, and the 2015 General Elections YouGov predicted UKIP lower (or the lowest) compared to other pollsters..	In the London mayor elections of 2016, YouGov predicted UKIP higher than any other listed polls.
in the 2009 eu elections, the 2014 eu elections, and the 2015 general elections yougov predicted ukip lower (or the lowest) compared to other pollsters..	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.2.1.	In the 2009 EU Elections, the 2014 EU Elections, and the 2015 General Elections YouGov predicted UKIP lower (or the lowest) compared to other pollsters..	pro	
in the london mayor elections of 2016, yougov predicted ukip higher than any other listed polls.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.2.2.2.2.	In the London mayor elections of 2016, YouGov predicted UKIP higher than any other listed polls.	con	
if we want to know the answer to a different question to that asked in the referendum and be able to action it, then we need to formally ask that question in a referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.	If we want to know the answer to a different question to that asked in the referendum and be able to action it, then we need to formally ask that question in a referendum.	con	Polls work well at finding public opinion, therefore the government can use them to make decisions they know the public support.	-> See discussion #10250: Voters in the UK should have a final vote on the Brexit deal.	Referendums are generally a bad idea. They are the tools of dictators and demagogues, a point agreed by both Atlee and Thatcher.
polls work well at finding public opinion, therefore the government can use them to make decisions they know the public support.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.	Polls work well at finding public opinion, therefore the government can use them to make decisions they know the public support.	pro	Opinion polls are notoriously unreliable as certain opinion sets are less likely to participate in polls than others.	Looking at polls for the last week of campaigns for 220 national elections in 32 countries over the decades to 2017 – with data for a handful of countries stretching back to 1942 – errors have held steady at about 2%.	A dataset of countries that had regular polling over several decades found that polling errors have dropped over time.	Recent popular opinion that polls are getting worse are incorrect. There is no evidence that poll errors have increased over time.	The bandwagon effect influences the results of democratic elections.	Although polls give a good idea of public opinion, they also have an impact on public opinion due to the bandwagon effect. Conducting an increasing number of polls, sometimes of disproportionate selected groups of the electorate or on limited selective options, is therefore irresponsible.	Polls are easily abuseable, and are used to purposefully give false information in a package which many people will believe.
looking at polls for the last week of campaigns for 220 national elections in 32 countries over the decades to 2017 – with data for a handful of countries stretching back to 1942 – errors have held steady at about 2%.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.2.	Looking at polls for the last week of campaigns for 220 national elections in 32 countries over the decades to 2017 – with data for a handful of countries stretching back to 1942 – errors have held steady at about 2%.	pro	
a dataset of countries that had regular polling over several decades found that polling errors have dropped over time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.3.	A dataset of countries that had regular polling over several decades found that polling errors have dropped over time.	pro	
recent popular opinion that polls are getting worse are incorrect. there is no evidence that poll errors have increased over time.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.4.	Recent popular opinion that polls are getting worse are incorrect. There is no evidence that poll errors have increased over time.	pro	
the bandwagon effect influences the results of democratic elections.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.	The bandwagon effect influences the results of democratic elections.	con	Selective publication of single data points from misleading polls is part of a right-wing tactical gaming of the media.	The bandwagon effect would continue without opinion polls, but instead be based on inaccurate perceptions.
selective publication of single data points from misleading polls is part of a right-wing tactical gaming of the media.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.1.	Selective publication of single data points from misleading polls is part of a right-wing tactical gaming of the media.	con	
the bandwagon effect would continue without opinion polls, but instead be based on inaccurate perceptions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.	The bandwagon effect would continue without opinion polls, but instead be based on inaccurate perceptions.	pro	Without opinion polls, voters will rely on their 'gut feeling' of how likely each party is to win. This is more likely to be incorrect as it is based on circumstantial or anecdotal evidence.	Bandwagon/contagion voting is a part of the human thought process, and not caused by polling. Humans want to be on the winning side, and so the effect would continue even if polls were unavailable.	Constant repetitious polling amplifies the bandwagon effect by flooding media, notably social media, with bite-size selective, unrepresentative data.
without opinion polls, voters will rely on their 'gut feeling' of how likely each party is to win. this is more likely to be incorrect as it is based on circumstantial or anecdotal evidence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.1.	Without opinion polls, voters will rely on their 'gut feeling' of how likely each party is to win. This is more likely to be incorrect as it is based on circumstantial or anecdotal evidence.	pro	When politically motivated interest groups commission polls, they are often not intended as a guide for voters to help them make correct political decisions, but are for social and political commentators to sell news. They are now being gamed by politicians to influence elections.	People's gut feeling about who they want to win cannot be incorrect. That, and knowledge of policies and track records, is precisely how people should make electoral choices, not on who is most likely to win.	People's gut feeling, being more directly related to their emotions, experience and political views, of who is likely to win is a better measure than a badly worded and/ or politically motivated and/or selective option opinion poll.
when politically motivated interest groups commission polls, they are often not intended as a guide for voters to help them make correct political decisions, but are for social and political commentators to sell news. they are now being gamed by politicians to influence elections.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.1.1.	When politically motivated interest groups commission polls, they are often not intended as a guide for voters to help them make correct political decisions, but are for social and political commentators to sell news. They are now being gamed by politicians to influence elections.	con	
people's gut feeling about who they want to win cannot be incorrect. that, and knowledge of policies and track records, is precisely how people should make electoral choices, not on who is most likely to win.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.1.2.	People's gut feeling about who they want to win cannot be incorrect. That, and knowledge of policies and track records, is precisely how people should make electoral choices, not on who is most likely to win.	con	Gut feelings about "who they want to win" and "who they think will win" are different. Only the latter affects the bandwagon effect.
gut feelings about "who they want to win" and "who they think will win" are different. only the latter affects the bandwagon effect.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.1.2.1.	Gut feelings about "who they want to win" and "who they think will win" are different. Only the latter affects the bandwagon effect.	pro	
people's gut feeling, being more directly related to their emotions, experience and political views, of who is likely to win is a better measure than a badly worded and/ or politically motivated and/or selective option opinion poll.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.1.3.	People's gut feeling, being more directly related to their emotions, experience and political views, of who is likely to win is a better measure than a badly worded and/ or politically motivated and/or selective option opinion poll.	con	
bandwagon/contagion voting is a part of the human thought process, and not caused by polling. humans want to be on the winning side, and so the effect would continue even if polls were unavailable.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.2.	Bandwagon/contagion voting is a part of the human thought process, and not caused by polling. Humans want to be on the winning side, and so the effect would continue even if polls were unavailable.	pro	The deliberate staging of polls excluding certain options or demographics to demonstrate support for preferred options exploits this effect.
the deliberate staging of polls excluding certain options or demographics to demonstrate support for preferred options exploits this effect.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.2.1.	The deliberate staging of polls excluding certain options or demographics to demonstrate support for preferred options exploits this effect.	con	Polls are easily abuseable, and are used to purposefully give false information in a package which many people will believe.
polls are easily abuseable, and are used to purposefully give false information in a package which many people will believe.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.2.1.1.	Polls are easily abuseable, and are used to purposefully give false information in a package which many people will believe.	con	Selective publication of single data points from misleading polls is part of a right-wing tactical gaming of the media.	When politically motivated interest groups commission polls, they are often not intended as a guide for voters to help them make correct political decisions, but are for social and political commentators to sell news. They are now being gamed by politicians to influence elections.
constant repetitious polling amplifies the bandwagon effect by flooding media, notably social media, with bite-size selective, unrepresentative data.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.3.	Constant repetitious polling amplifies the bandwagon effect by flooding media, notably social media, with bite-size selective, unrepresentative data.	con	Good polls use oversampling or undersampling to account for groups who would otherwise be under-represented.	This assumes the polls are inaccurate, which is generally untrue.	The problem is with fake news, not fake polls.
this assumes the polls are inaccurate, which is generally untrue.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.3.2.	This assumes the polls are inaccurate, which is generally untrue.	pro	Looking at polls for the last week of campaigns for 220 national elections in 32 countries over the decades to 2017 – with data for a handful of countries stretching back to 1942 – errors have held steady at about 2%.	A dataset of countries that had regular polling over several decades found that polling errors have dropped over time.
the problem is with fake news, not fake polls.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.3.3.	The problem is with fake news, not fake polls.	pro	Purposeful misinformation is an inherent part of modern society, be that outright fake news spreading faster than real news or the mostly biased media writing misleading or one-sided content.
purposeful misinformation is an inherent part of modern society, be that outright fake news spreading faster than real news or the mostly biased media writing misleading or one-sided content.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.5.2.3.3.1.	Purposeful misinformation is an inherent part of modern society, be that outright fake news spreading faster than real news or the mostly biased media writing misleading or one-sided content.	pro	
although polls give a good idea of public opinion, they also have an impact on public opinion due to the bandwagon effect. conducting an increasing number of polls, sometimes of disproportionate selected groups of the electorate or on limited selective options, is therefore irresponsible.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.1.6.	Although polls give a good idea of public opinion, they also have an impact on public opinion due to the bandwagon effect. Conducting an increasing number of polls, sometimes of disproportionate selected groups of the electorate or on limited selective options, is therefore irresponsible.	con	The bandwagon effect would continue without opinion polls, but instead be based on inaccurate perceptions.
-> see discussion #10250: voters in the uk should have a final vote on the brexit deal.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.2.	-> See discussion #10250: Voters in the UK should have a final vote on the Brexit deal.	con	
referendums are generally a bad idea. they are the tools of dictators and demagogues, a point agreed by both atlee and thatcher.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.3.	Referendums are generally a bad idea. They are the tools of dictators and demagogues, a point agreed by both Atlee and Thatcher.	pro	-> See discussion #28455: All major political decisions should be made via public referendum.	-> See discussion #1785: Democracies should not use referendums for policy decisions.
-> see discussion #28455: all major political decisions should be made via public referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.3.1.	-> See discussion #28455: All major political decisions should be made via public referendum.	con	
-> see discussion #1785: democracies should not use referendums for policy decisions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.3.3.2.	-> See discussion #1785: Democracies should not use referendums for policy decisions.	pro	
in the european elections appoximately 40.4% of votes went to explicitly pro-remain parties (ld, green, snp, plaid, change) while only 34.9% went to explicit no-deal parties (brexit, ukip). the remaining 23.2% went to parties currently trying to offer some form of compromise (labour, conservative).	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.4.	In the European elections appoximately 40.4% of votes went to explicitly Pro-Remain parties (LD, Green, SNP, Plaid, Change) while only 34.9% went to explicit No-Deal parties (Brexit, UKIP). The remaining 23.2% went to parties currently trying to offer some form of compromise (Labour, Conservative).	con	The turnout of 36.7% was fairly low, so the views expressed in these elections might not represent true support for the various options.	EU election results are an imperfect way to measure No-Deal/Remain sentiment, because it was a election on a wide range of issues.
the turnout of 36.7% was fairly low, so the views expressed in these elections might not represent true support for the various options.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.4.1.	The turnout of 36.7% was fairly low, so the views expressed in these elections might not represent true support for the various options.	pro	
eu election results are an imperfect way to measure no-deal/remain sentiment, because it was a election on a wide range of issues.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.4.2.	EU election results are an imperfect way to measure No-Deal/Remain sentiment, because it was a election on a wide range of issues.	pro	The Green Party may be seeing growth due to the current environmental catastrophe.	In the event of No-Deal, the MEPs elected would not even make it to Brussels. Thus for No-Deal supporting Brexiters there was no reason/incentive to vote for any party besides the Brexit Party.
the green party may be seeing growth due to the current environmental catastrophe.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.4.2.1.	The Green Party may be seeing growth due to the current environmental catastrophe.	pro	
in the event of no-deal, the meps elected would not even make it to brussels. thus for no-deal supporting brexiters there was no reason/incentive to vote for any party besides the brexit party.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.5.4.2.2.	In the event of No-Deal, the MEPs elected would not even make it to Brussels. Thus for No-Deal supporting Brexiters there was no reason/incentive to vote for any party besides the Brexit Party.	con	
the public does not support a no deal when all other options are kept on the table.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.6.	The public does not support a no deal when all other options are kept on the table.	con	In a February 2019 YouGov poll asking how good various outcome would be, the majority preferred remaining or leaving with an alternative deal, and also narrowly accepted leaving with Mays withdrawal bill over the No-deal brexit option.	According to YouGov polling in April 2019 asking for peoples "Preferred Option" only 26% of respondants chose No deal. 37% prefered remaining, and 23% prefered a deal.
in a february 2019 yougov poll asking how good various outcome would be, the majority preferred remaining or leaving with an alternative deal, and also narrowly accepted leaving with mays withdrawal bill over the no-deal brexit option.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.6.1.	In a February 2019 YouGov poll asking how good various outcome would be, the majority preferred remaining or leaving with an alternative deal, and also narrowly accepted leaving with Mays withdrawal bill over the No-deal brexit option.	con	
according to yougov polling in april 2019 asking for peoples "preferred option" only 26% of respondants chose no deal. 37% prefered remaining, and 23% prefered a deal.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.1.10.6.2.	According to YouGov polling in April 2019 asking for peoples "Preferred Option" only 26% of respondants chose No deal. 37% prefered remaining, and 23% prefered a deal.	con	
the referendum was badly drafted, because it did not distinguish between vastly different versions of brexit. leave voters themselves do not agree which version they want. if and when the government eventually decides what brexit it wants, the majority of the public may be against it.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.	The referendum was badly drafted, because it did not distinguish between vastly different versions of Brexit. Leave voters themselves do not agree which version they want. If and when the Government eventually decides what Brexit it wants, the majority of the public may be against it.	con	The WTO governed trade relationship with the EU in the event of no deal would not represent an outcome that the electorate voted for.	This point confuses the role of the referendum - to decide whether to leave the EU - and the role of government, which is to negotiate arrangements with 3rd parties on our behalf.	Voting for Leave in the Brexit referendum, by a narrow margin of 51.89-48.11, was not necessarily a vote for a hard Brexit.	"Referendums should be held when people know exactly what they are getting... We should not ask people to vote on a blank sheet of paper and tell them to trust us to fill in the details afterwards" David Davis (now Secretary of State for Leaving the EU) said in 2002.	The exact outcome does not need to be clear for the result to have democratic legitimacy.
this point confuses the role of the referendum - to decide whether to leave the eu - and the role of government, which is to negotiate arrangements with 3rd parties on our behalf.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.2.	This point confuses the role of the referendum - to decide whether to leave the EU - and the role of government, which is to negotiate arrangements with 3rd parties on our behalf.	pro	The decision to leave the EU can only be made properly when the alternative to the EU is clear. While they are two different processes, one may choose to leave the EU in the hope of a particular alternative, but the actual alternative offered in the end may be much worse, at which point the initial decision to leave the EU is not legitimate.
the decision to leave the eu can only be made properly when the alternative to the eu is clear. while they are two different processes, one may choose to leave the eu in the hope of a particular alternative, but the actual alternative offered in the end may be much worse, at which point the initial decision to leave the eu is not legitimate.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.2.1.	The decision to leave the EU can only be made properly when the alternative to the EU is clear. While they are two different processes, one may choose to leave the EU in the hope of a particular alternative, but the actual alternative offered in the end may be much worse, at which point the initial decision to leave the EU is not legitimate.	con	The WTO governed trade relationship with the EU in the event of no deal would not represent an outcome that the electorate voted for.
voting for leave in the brexit referendum, by a narrow margin of 51.89-48.11, was not necessarily a vote for a hard brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.3.	Voting for Leave in the Brexit referendum, by a narrow margin of 51.89-48.11, was not necessarily a vote for a hard Brexit.	con	Many people considered maintaining access to the single market an important priority in the negotiations.	A roughly 50/50 split, as in this case, cannot be considered a consensus of the British people.	We do not know the breakdown of issues that people voted Leave for, but it is clear that there were those who did so on the understanding that the UK would remain in the Single Market. If we leave the Single Market, the will of those particular Leave voters would be disrespected.
many people considered maintaining access to the single market an important priority in the negotiations.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.3.1.	Many people considered maintaining access to the single market an important priority in the negotiations.	con	
a roughly 50/50 split, as in this case, cannot be considered a consensus of the british people.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.3.2.	A roughly 50/50 split, as in this case, cannot be considered a consensus of the British people.	con	
we do not know the breakdown of issues that people voted leave for, but it is clear that there were those who did so on the understanding that the uk would remain in the single market. if we leave the single market, the will of those particular leave voters would be disrespected.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.3.3.	We do not know the breakdown of issues that people voted Leave for, but it is clear that there were those who did so on the understanding that the UK would remain in the Single Market. If we leave the Single Market, the will of those particular Leave voters would be disrespected.	con	One of those voters so disrespected would be Nigel Farage. Nigel Farage is the leader of the Brexit Party, who are campaigning for the UK to leave the EU with no deal. Nigel Farage has, having told one story to win the referendum vote, changed his position to a far more extreme one and is pretending nothing has changed.
one of those voters so disrespected would be nigel farage. nigel farage is the leader of the brexit party, who are campaigning for the uk to leave the eu with no deal. nigel farage has, having told one story to win the referendum vote, changed his position to a far more extreme one and is pretending nothing has changed.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.3.3.1.	One of those voters so disrespected would be Nigel Farage. Nigel Farage is the leader of the Brexit Party, who are campaigning for the UK to leave the EU with no deal. Nigel Farage has, having told one story to win the referendum vote, changed his position to a far more extreme one and is pretending nothing has changed.	con	
"referendums should be held when people know exactly what they are getting... we should not ask people to vote on a blank sheet of paper and tell them to trust us to fill in the details afterwards" david davis (now secretary of state for leaving the eu) said in 2002.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.4.	"Referendums should be held when people know exactly what they are getting... We should not ask people to vote on a blank sheet of paper and tell them to trust us to fill in the details afterwards" David Davis (now Secretary of State for Leaving the EU) said in 2002.	con	
the exact outcome does not need to be clear for the result to have democratic legitimacy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.5.	The exact outcome does not need to be clear for the result to have democratic legitimacy.	pro	Referenda are not legally binding in the United Kingdom, as it is recognised that Parliament has sovereign authority.	Compared to a manifesto that voters use to determine which party they will vote for at a general election, the question and possible outcomes were narrower for this referendum.
compared to a manifesto that voters use to determine which party they will vote for at a general election, the question and possible outcomes were narrower for this referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.4.13.2.3.5.2.	Compared to a manifesto that voters use to determine which party they will vote for at a general election, the question and possible outcomes were narrower for this referendum.	pro	
remaining in the eu would exacerbate political instability.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.	Remaining in the EU would exacerbate political instability.	pro	Disarray in British politics isn't necessarily negative, as it may call into question the existing system and lead to calls for reform.	The British public voted to leave the EU. Democratic will requires that the outcome of the referendum must be respected, thus the UK must leave the EU regardless of the deal secured.	A hard Brexit threatens the constitutional set-up of the United Kingdom and its associated territories, more so than overturning the referendum result and staying in the EU.	Domestic British politics will be in chaos now whatever happens.	Fractured and irreconcilable differences over the EU is the cause of the failure of the Conservative Party, which is the cause of the failure of uk politics and leaving will not address this issue.	Refusing to enact the specific instructions from the electorate may lead to widespread civil disobedience, with negative consequences that dwarf any possible drawbacks from a hard Brexit.	The public has shown more support for a No-Deal than for remaining.	Even just trying to leave the EU has brought down two governments, and may in fact be about to destroy the two-party system which had carried on for a century. That's pretty unstable.	Leaving the EU is a project that is so all-encompassing that it will dominate the activities of the British government for years to come. Therefore without a majority-supported clear course of action, Brexit is unsustainable in the long term, and even in the short term.	Deciding to remain in the EU grants UKIP a new and powerful antiestablishment narrative of betrayal.	Opinion polls indicate that the public regrets the Brexit vote. A YouGov survey, this past October, found that only 42% of respondents think it is right to leave the EU, compared with 47% who think it is wrong. This is a shift since the referendum.
disarray in british politics isn't necessarily negative, as it may call into question the existing system and lead to calls for reform.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.1.	Disarray in British politics isn't necessarily negative, as it may call into question the existing system and lead to calls for reform.	con	This reform could include rethinking the two (three) party system, and the need for proportionality voting. If Brexit does not work out, it may become clear that having two parties vying for votes by diametrically opposing each other does not lead to successful policies. It may indicate the need for broader electoral support, and coalitions between parties.
this reform could include rethinking the two (three) party system, and the need for proportionality voting. if brexit does not work out, it may become clear that having two parties vying for votes by diametrically opposing each other does not lead to successful policies. it may indicate the need for broader electoral support, and coalitions between parties.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.1.1.	This reform could include rethinking the two (three) party system, and the need for proportionality voting. If Brexit does not work out, it may become clear that having two parties vying for votes by diametrically opposing each other does not lead to successful policies. It may indicate the need for broader electoral support, and coalitions between parties.	con	
a hard brexit threatens the constitutional set-up of the united kingdom and its associated territories, more so than overturning the referendum result and staying in the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.	A hard Brexit threatens the constitutional set-up of the United Kingdom and its associated territories, more so than overturning the referendum result and staying in the EU.	con	A hard Brexit is simply an excuse used by people who wanted to threaten the unity of the United Kingdom before the Brexit referendum was even a glimmer in David Cameron's eye.	A hard Brexit could trigger a second independence referendum within Scotland.	Strong independence movements exist within the European Union, as illustrated by the recent crisis in Catalonia. There's no reason to believe that remaining in the EU would protect the UK from secession.	A hard Brexit threatens British sovereignty over Gibraltar (a small territory bordering Southern Spain.	A hard Brexit would throw into disarray the constitutional arrangement between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, which represents a serious threat to the peace of the citizens of Northern Ireland.
a hard brexit is simply an excuse used by people who wanted to threaten the unity of the united kingdom before the brexit referendum was even a glimmer in david cameron's eye.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.1.	A hard Brexit is simply an excuse used by people who wanted to threaten the unity of the United Kingdom before the Brexit referendum was even a glimmer in David Cameron's eye.	pro	Sinn Fein has long been calling for reunification of the island of Ireland since well before the EU referendum.	The SNP has long been calling for secession of Scotland.	Welsh nationalists have long been calling for secession of Wales.	Brexit gives weight to nationalist political parties who will insist that England is forcing its own agenda on Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
sinn fein has long been calling for reunification of the island of ireland since well before the eu referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.1.1.	Sinn Fein has long been calling for reunification of the island of Ireland since well before the EU referendum.	pro	
the snp has long been calling for secession of scotland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.1.2.	The SNP has long been calling for secession of Scotland.	pro	
welsh nationalists have long been calling for secession of wales.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.1.3.	Welsh nationalists have long been calling for secession of Wales.	pro	
brexit gives weight to nationalist political parties who will insist that england is forcing its own agenda on scotland, wales and northern ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.1.4.	Brexit gives weight to nationalist political parties who will insist that England is forcing its own agenda on Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.	con	
a hard brexit could trigger a second independence referendum within scotland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.	A hard Brexit could trigger a second independence referendum within Scotland.	con	This could happen anyway. All voters in the first Scottish referendum were aware there was an upcoming referendum on EU membership and so this was factored in to voting decisions.	If Brexit proves to harm the UK economy as many people predict, then it could persuade enough people in Scotland to leave the UK. During the original Scottish Independence Referendum, the Better Together website said: “Scotland enjoys membership of the EU because of our membership of the UK and if we no longer are members of the UK then it follows that we are no longer part of the EU.” Link. Scots who voted to stay in the UK for continued EU membership now feel cheated as a result of Brexit.	The SNP is unlikely to hold a second independence referendum as only 46% of Scots support it.	First Minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon claims it is "likely" that a referendum will take place before 2021.	Scotland voted overwhelmingly to stay within the European Union, a margin of 62% to 38%, with every single electorate returning a majority in favour of Remain.
this could happen anyway. all voters in the first scottish referendum were aware there was an upcoming referendum on eu membership and so this was factored in to voting decisions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.1.	This could happen anyway. All voters in the first Scottish referendum were aware there was an upcoming referendum on EU membership and so this was factored in to voting decisions.	pro	The campaign for Scotland remaining in the UK stated:"What is process for removing our EU citizenship? Voting yes." This suggests voters did not factor this in to their decision. In fact, it claimed that their desire to stay in the EU was a reason to vote for the Union, whereas today they would more likely to see independence as the best route to staying in the EU.
the campaign for scotland remaining in the uk stated:"what is process for removing our eu citizenship? voting yes." this suggests voters did not factor this in to their decision. in fact, it claimed that their desire to stay in the eu was a reason to vote for the union, whereas today they would more likely to see independence as the best route to staying in the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.1.1.	The campaign for Scotland remaining in the UK stated:"What is process for removing our EU citizenship? Voting yes." This suggests voters did not factor this in to their decision. In fact, it claimed that their desire to stay in the EU was a reason to vote for the Union, whereas today they would more likely to see independence as the best route to staying in the EU.	con	
if brexit proves to harm the uk economy as many people predict, then it could persuade enough people in scotland to leave the uk. during the original scottish independence referendum, the better together website said: “scotland enjoys membership of the eu because of our membership of the uk and if we no longer are members of the uk then it follows that we are no longer part of the eu.” link. scots who voted to stay in the uk for continued eu membership now feel cheated as a result of brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.2.	If Brexit proves to harm the UK economy as many people predict, then it could persuade enough people in Scotland to leave the UK. During the original Scottish Independence Referendum, the Better Together website said: “Scotland enjoys membership of the EU because of our membership of the UK and if we no longer are members of the UK then it follows that we are no longer part of the EU.” Link. Scots who voted to stay in the UK for continued EU membership now feel cheated as a result of Brexit.	con	
the snp is unlikely to hold a second independence referendum as only 46% of scots support it.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.3.	The SNP is unlikely to hold a second independence referendum as only 46% of Scots support it.	pro	It is highly unlikely that the SNP will choose to call for a second referendum unless they're certain to win, as a loss would be a devastating blow to their party.	The Scottish National Party does not have an established timeframe for a second referendum, showing no current intention to push for one.
it is highly unlikely that the snp will choose to call for a second referendum unless they're certain to win, as a loss would be a devastating blow to their party.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.3.1.	It is highly unlikely that the SNP will choose to call for a second referendum unless they're certain to win, as a loss would be a devastating blow to their party.	pro	
the scottish national party does not have an established timeframe for a second referendum, showing no current intention to push for one.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.3.2.	The Scottish National Party does not have an established timeframe for a second referendum, showing no current intention to push for one.	pro	
first minister of scotland nicola sturgeon claims it is "likely" that a referendum will take place before 2021.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.4.	First Minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon claims it is "likely" that a referendum will take place before 2021.	con	The Scottish Government were elected on a manifesto that said they would seek to hold another referendum in the event of a vote for Brexit. They won a majority of seats at UK and Scottish level on this manifesto.	It is in the interests of the leader of the Scottish National Party to claim a second referendum will take place, as it will keep her hard nationalist base happy. Her statements should not be read as accurate predictions.	It is impossible for there to be another Independence Referendum without approval from the Prime Minister under Section 30 of the Scotland Act.
the scottish government were elected on a manifesto that said they would seek to hold another referendum in the event of a vote for brexit. they won a majority of seats at uk and scottish level on this manifesto.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.4.1.	The Scottish Government were elected on a manifesto that said they would seek to hold another referendum in the event of a vote for Brexit. They won a majority of seats at UK and Scottish level on this manifesto.	con	
it is in the interests of the leader of the scottish national party to claim a second referendum will take place, as it will keep her hard nationalist base happy. her statements should not be read as accurate predictions.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.4.2.	It is in the interests of the leader of the Scottish National Party to claim a second referendum will take place, as it will keep her hard nationalist base happy. Her statements should not be read as accurate predictions.	pro	
it is impossible for there to be another independence referendum without approval from the prime minister under section 30 of the scotland act.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.4.3.	It is impossible for there to be another Independence Referendum without approval from the Prime Minister under Section 30 of the Scotland Act.	pro	
scotland voted overwhelmingly to stay within the european union, a margin of 62% to 38%, with every single electorate returning a majority in favour of remain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.2.5.	Scotland voted overwhelmingly to stay within the European Union, a margin of 62% to 38%, with every single electorate returning a majority in favour of Remain.	con	
strong independence movements exist within the european union, as illustrated by the recent crisis in catalonia. there's no reason to believe that remaining in the eu would protect the uk from secession.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.	Strong independence movements exist within the European Union, as illustrated by the recent crisis in Catalonia. There's no reason to believe that remaining in the EU would protect the UK from secession.	pro	Calatonian independence movement is pro EU. In the UK Northern Ireland independence movement wants to get independence mainly because after Brexit the free border with Ireland will be closed, resulting in huge damages for the Northern Ireland economy and in a hard divison of the island.	Ruling by example is good choice. It's difficult to claim union while breaking up bigger commitments in pro of equality in terms of rights and obligations
calatonian independence movement is pro eu. in the uk northern ireland independence movement wants to get independence mainly because after brexit the free border with ireland will be closed, resulting in huge damages for the northern ireland economy and in a hard divison of the island.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.1.	Calatonian independence movement is pro EU. In the UK Northern Ireland independence movement wants to get independence mainly because after Brexit the free border with Ireland will be closed, resulting in huge damages for the Northern Ireland economy and in a hard divison of the island.	con	The EU contributed to 8.4% of the Northern Irish GDP through financial aid. Without its support the Northern Irish economy will suffer.
the eu contributed to 8.4% of the northern irish gdp through financial aid. without its support the northern irish economy will suffer.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.1.1.	The EU contributed to 8.4% of the Northern Irish GDP through financial aid. Without its support the Northern Irish economy will suffer.	con	This was the UK's money to begin with. The UK government has already committed to very significant increases in NI funding.	This assumes a post Brexit UK will not be able to secure new lucrative trade opportunities, which is very much up for debate.	Westminster is likely to offer more financial support to plug the gap, both because of the DUP's position in Theresa May's government, and to ensure stability.
this was the uk's money to begin with. the uk government has already committed to very significant increases in ni funding.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.1.1.1.	This was the UK's money to begin with. The UK government has already committed to very significant increases in NI funding.	pro	
this assumes a post brexit uk will not be able to secure new lucrative trade opportunities, which is very much up for debate.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.1.1.2.	This assumes a post Brexit UK will not be able to secure new lucrative trade opportunities, which is very much up for debate.	pro	
westminster is likely to offer more financial support to plug the gap, both because of the dup's position in theresa may's government, and to ensure stability.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.1.1.3.	Westminster is likely to offer more financial support to plug the gap, both because of the DUP's position in Theresa May's government, and to ensure stability.	pro	
ruling by example is good choice. it's difficult to claim union while breaking up bigger commitments in pro of equality in terms of rights and obligations	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.3.2.	Ruling by example is good choice. It's difficult to claim union while breaking up bigger commitments in pro of equality in terms of rights and obligations	con	
a hard brexit threatens british sovereignty over gibraltar (a small territory bordering southern spain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.4.	A hard Brexit threatens British sovereignty over Gibraltar (a small territory bordering Southern Spain.	con	A change to the status of Gibraltar would not alter the constitutional set-up of the UK, as Gibraltar is not part of the UK.	Spain's primary route to bullying and threatening the people of Gibraltar is through its use of veto in the EU. If there is no deal with the EU, Spain has nothing to veto. A soft Brexit is therefore much more threatening to Gibraltar.	Spain has been awarded a veto on all trade deals with Gibraltar in future EU negotiations. It could use this to strong-arm Gibraltar to accept Spanish sovereignty.
a change to the status of gibraltar would not alter the constitutional set-up of the uk, as gibraltar is not part of the uk.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.4.1.	A change to the status of Gibraltar would not alter the constitutional set-up of the UK, as Gibraltar is not part of the UK.	pro	Gibraltar is part of the Overseas Territories of the UK, and therefore it affects the constitution of the UK by proxy.
gibraltar is part of the overseas territories of the uk, and therefore it affects the constitution of the uk by proxy.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.4.1.1.	Gibraltar is part of the Overseas Territories of the UK, and therefore it affects the constitution of the UK by proxy.	con	
spain's primary route to bullying and threatening the people of gibraltar is through its use of veto in the eu. if there is no deal with the eu, spain has nothing to veto. a soft brexit is therefore much more threatening to gibraltar.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.4.2.	Spain's primary route to bullying and threatening the people of Gibraltar is through its use of veto in the EU. If there is no deal with the EU, Spain has nothing to veto. A soft Brexit is therefore much more threatening to Gibraltar.	pro	Spain's veto applies to any future EU deals, and so while a no deal may leave Spain temporarily with nothing to veto, when the UK eventually makes a trade deal with the EU Spain will still be able to use it.
spain's veto applies to any future eu deals, and so while a no deal may leave spain temporarily with nothing to veto, when the uk eventually makes a trade deal with the eu spain will still be able to use it.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.4.2.1.	Spain's veto applies to any future EU deals, and so while a no deal may leave Spain temporarily with nothing to veto, when the UK eventually makes a trade deal with the EU Spain will still be able to use it.	con	
spain has been awarded a veto on all trade deals with gibraltar in future eu negotiations. it could use this to strong-arm gibraltar to accept spanish sovereignty.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.4.3.	Spain has been awarded a veto on all trade deals with Gibraltar in future EU negotiations. It could use this to strong-arm Gibraltar to accept Spanish sovereignty.	con	
a hard brexit would throw into disarray the constitutional arrangement between the republic of ireland and northern ireland, which represents a serious threat to the peace of the citizens of northern ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.	A hard Brexit would throw into disarray the constitutional arrangement between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, which represents a serious threat to the peace of the citizens of Northern Ireland.	con	There is no constitutional legal barrier to the UK leaving the EU. The constitutional arrangement between NI and the rest of the UK predates the EU.	The party which won 55% of NI seats in the 2017 general election campaign had a manifesto committment to leave the EU, and to renege on this would throw into disarray the constitutional arrangement between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, which represents a serious threat to peace for the citizens of Northern Ireland.	A hard exit from the EU could call the Good Friday Agreement into question and could possibly cause a return to the violence and terror present in Northern Ireland during The Troubles.	The possibility of a no-deal Brexit has already shifted the balance in Northern Ireland.	A hard Brexit could lead to a secession of Northern Ireland to rejoin the Republic of Ireland and the European Union.	Preventing a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland could be incompatible with leaving the Customs Union.
there is no constitutional legal barrier to the uk leaving the eu. the constitutional arrangement between ni and the rest of the uk predates the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.1.	There is no constitutional legal barrier to the UK leaving the EU. The constitutional arrangement between NI and the rest of the UK predates the EU.	pro	
the party which won 55% of ni seats in the 2017 general election campaign had a manifesto committment to leave the eu, and to renege on this would throw into disarray the constitutional arrangement between the republic of ireland and northern ireland, which represents a serious threat to peace for the citizens of northern ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.2.	The party which won 55% of NI seats in the 2017 general election campaign had a manifesto committment to leave the EU, and to renege on this would throw into disarray the constitutional arrangement between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, which represents a serious threat to peace for the citizens of Northern Ireland.	pro	Notwithstanding the percentage of seats won, this party represents a minority position (25.7%) 1.2% above the second placed party. UK General election 2017 (Northern Ireland)	Manifesto commitments are often dropped by Governments when proved to be unpopular or unworkable.
notwithstanding the percentage of seats won, this party represents a minority position (25.7%) 1.2% above the second placed party. uk general election 2017 (northern ireland)	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.2.1.	Notwithstanding the percentage of seats won, this party represents a minority position (25.7%) 1.2% above the second placed party. UK General election 2017 (Northern Ireland)	con	
manifesto commitments are often dropped by governments when proved to be unpopular or unworkable.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.2.2.	Manifesto commitments are often dropped by Governments when proved to be unpopular or unworkable.	con	
a hard exit from the eu could call the good friday agreement into question and could possibly cause a return to the violence and terror present in northern ireland during the troubles.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.	A hard exit from the EU could call the Good Friday Agreement into question and could possibly cause a return to the violence and terror present in Northern Ireland during The Troubles.	con	Violence has never fully ceased in Northern Ireland and so it would not be a large stretch for it to return to the way it was before the Good Friday Agreement.	There is nothing in the Good Friday Agreement that prohibits the UK leaving the EU.	The Sinn Féin President, Gerry Adams, argued that Brexit will ‘destroy the Good Friday Agreement’, being at odds with consent for change, undermining its human rights elements and reinforcing the border.	The Police Service of Northern Ireland has observed that dissident Republicans and criminal gangs will also seek to tap into the smuggling opportunity presented by a customs border. This could lead to reorganization of old groups as well as new financial streams for them.	Irish Republicans currently lack political leadership to organize violence.	The UK will no doubt have to increase support for peace programs and negotiate a new border policy. But with sensible policies peace in Northern Ireland can be maintained.	Brexit occurs at a time whenshifting demographics in Northern Ireland are tipping in favour of nationalists. Already, in the most recent elections, the unionist majority has disappeared. Within a decade, there will be a significant nationalist majority in favour of unification. Tensions between communities are running high and there is truly the potential for a return to conflict and violence. Everything must be done to ensure the GFA is protected and a hard border across the island is avoided.	Irish member of parliament Neale Richmond warned that border posts would be a “target for dissident paramilitaries.”
violence has never fully ceased in northern ireland and so it would not be a large stretch for it to return to the way it was before the good friday agreement.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.1.	Violence has never fully ceased in Northern Ireland and so it would not be a large stretch for it to return to the way it was before the Good Friday Agreement.	con	On Feb 2017 there was a bomb explosion at a police officer’s house in Derry/Londonderry. It is suspected that this was planned by violent dissident republicans.
on feb 2017 there was a bomb explosion at a police officer’s house in derry/londonderry. it is suspected that this was planned by violent dissident republicans.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.1.1.	On Feb 2017 there was a bomb explosion at a police officer’s house in Derry/Londonderry. It is suspected that this was planned by violent dissident republicans.	con	
there is nothing in the good friday agreement that prohibits the uk leaving the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.2.	There is nothing in the Good Friday Agreement that prohibits the UK leaving the EU.	pro	The Good Friday Agreement makes references to both the UK and the Republic of Ireland being part of the EU as well as an open border. Creating a hard border would violate the terms of the agreement and hence would need to be rewritten with consent from both sides. History has proved this to be very difficult. Good Friday Agreement
the good friday agreement makes references to both the uk and the republic of ireland being part of the eu as well as an open border. creating a hard border would violate the terms of the agreement and hence would need to be rewritten with consent from both sides. history has proved this to be very difficult. good friday agreement	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.2.1.	The Good Friday Agreement makes references to both the UK and the Republic of Ireland being part of the EU as well as an open border. Creating a hard border would violate the terms of the agreement and hence would need to be rewritten with consent from both sides. History has proved this to be very difficult. Good Friday Agreement	con	
the sinn féin president, gerry adams, argued that brexit will ‘destroy the good friday agreement’, being at odds with consent for change, undermining its human rights elements and reinforcing the border.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.3.	The Sinn Féin President, Gerry Adams, argued that Brexit will ‘destroy the Good Friday Agreement’, being at odds with consent for change, undermining its human rights elements and reinforcing the border.	con	
the police service of northern ireland has observed that dissident republicans and criminal gangs will also seek to tap into the smuggling opportunity presented by a customs border. this could lead to reorganization of old groups as well as new financial streams for them.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.4.	The Police Service of Northern Ireland has observed that dissident Republicans and criminal gangs will also seek to tap into the smuggling opportunity presented by a customs border. This could lead to reorganization of old groups as well as new financial streams for them.	con	
irish republicans currently lack political leadership to organize violence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.5.	Irish Republicans currently lack political leadership to organize violence.	pro	While they lack a prominent leader this does not seem to be stifling growth. Republican clubs and societies – broadly supportive of armed violence against the British state and not directly controlled by the Sinn Féin leadership − are increasingly active in border communities, drawing energy from the anger that has swelled in these areas since the Brexit vote.
while they lack a prominent leader this does not seem to be stifling growth. republican clubs and societies – broadly supportive of armed violence against the british state and not directly controlled by the sinn féin leadership − are increasingly active in border communities, drawing energy from the anger that has swelled in these areas since the brexit vote.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.5.1.	While they lack a prominent leader this does not seem to be stifling growth. Republican clubs and societies – broadly supportive of armed violence against the British state and not directly controlled by the Sinn Féin leadership − are increasingly active in border communities, drawing energy from the anger that has swelled in these areas since the Brexit vote.	con	
the uk will no doubt have to increase support for peace programs and negotiate a new border policy. but with sensible policies peace in northern ireland can be maintained.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.	The UK will no doubt have to increase support for peace programs and negotiate a new border policy. But with sensible policies peace in Northern Ireland can be maintained.	pro	A hard Brexit would lead to the return of an enforced border between Northern Ireland and The Republic of Ireland.
a hard brexit would lead to the return of an enforced border between northern ireland and the republic of ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.1.	A hard Brexit would lead to the return of an enforced border between Northern Ireland and The Republic of Ireland.	con	The fact there are no customs checks on the border is reliant on Northern Ireland and The Republic of Ireland having the same food, animal welfare, environmental, and other standards. Without these, customs checks would be needed.	The border could be, in effect, moved to the Irish Sea, leaving Northern Ireland effectively within the EU.
the fact there are no customs checks on the border is reliant on northern ireland and the republic of ireland having the same food, animal welfare, environmental, and other standards. without these, customs checks would be needed.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.1.1.	The fact there are no customs checks on the border is reliant on Northern Ireland and The Republic of Ireland having the same food, animal welfare, environmental, and other standards. Without these, customs checks would be needed.	con	
the border could be, in effect, moved to the irish sea, leaving northern ireland effectively within the eu.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.1.2.	The border could be, in effect, moved to the Irish Sea, leaving Northern Ireland effectively within the EU.	pro	This would effectively allow Northern Ireland a "back door" into the EU market. In the context of a hard Brexit this would likely be unacceptable to the EU member states.	Both the UK government and the DUP in Northern Ireland have ruled out this option.
this would effectively allow northern ireland a "back door" into the eu market. in the context of a hard brexit this would likely be unacceptable to the eu member states.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.1.2.1.	This would effectively allow Northern Ireland a "back door" into the EU market. In the context of a hard Brexit this would likely be unacceptable to the EU member states.	con	
both the uk government and the dup in northern ireland have ruled out this option.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.1.2.2.	Both the UK government and the DUP in Northern Ireland have ruled out this option.	con	The UK government have ruled out membership of the single market and the customs union. They've ruled out a hard border across the island. They've ruled out a border down the Irish Sea. This is, for obvious reasons, a logically incoherent position. The UK will have no choice but to renege on one of these commitments.
the uk government have ruled out membership of the single market and the customs union. they've ruled out a hard border across the island. they've ruled out a border down the irish sea. this is, for obvious reasons, a logically incoherent position. the uk will have no choice but to renege on one of these commitments.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.6.1.2.2.1.	The UK government have ruled out membership of the single market and the customs union. They've ruled out a hard border across the island. They've ruled out a border down the Irish Sea. This is, for obvious reasons, a logically incoherent position. The UK will have no choice but to renege on one of these commitments.	pro	
brexit occurs at a time whenshifting demographics in northern ireland are tipping in favour of nationalists. already, in the most recent elections, the unionist majority has disappeared. within a decade, there will be a significant nationalist majority in favour of unification. tensions between communities are running high and there is truly the potential for a return to conflict and violence. everything must be done to ensure the gfa is protected and a hard border across the island is avoided.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.7.	Brexit occurs at a time whenshifting demographics in Northern Ireland are tipping in favour of nationalists. Already, in the most recent elections, the unionist majority has disappeared. Within a decade, there will be a significant nationalist majority in favour of unification. Tensions between communities are running high and there is truly the potential for a return to conflict and violence. Everything must be done to ensure the GFA is protected and a hard border across the island is avoided.	con	
irish member of parliament neale richmond warned that border posts would be a “target for dissident paramilitaries.”	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.8.	Irish member of parliament Neale Richmond warned that border posts would be a “target for dissident paramilitaries.”	con	The UK government has repeatedly stated there will be no Irish border posts.
the uk government has repeatedly stated there will be no irish border posts.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.8.1.	The UK government has repeatedly stated there will be no Irish border posts.	pro	Stating something does not make it real. A stated desire for no border posts is a negotiating position, not a fact.
stating something does not make it real. a stated desire for no border posts is a negotiating position, not a fact.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.3.8.1.1.	Stating something does not make it real. A stated desire for no border posts is a negotiating position, not a fact.	con	
the possibility of a no-deal brexit has already shifted the balance in northern ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.4.	The possibility of a no-deal Brexit has already shifted the balance in Northern Ireland.	con	
a hard brexit could lead to a secession of northern ireland to rejoin the republic of ireland and the european union.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.	A hard Brexit could lead to a secession of Northern Ireland to rejoin the Republic of Ireland and the European Union.	con	The tightening of border controls, which would be necessary after a hard Brexit, will increase support for the succession of Northern Ireland.	This could happen anyway independent of Brexit.	Northern Ireland voted to Remain in the EU by a 10% margin (55-45).	The Democratic Unionist Party, the largest party in the Northern Irish Assembly, is opposed to seccession.	Even after the Brexit vote, support in Northern Ireland for reunification only stands at 22%.
the tightening of border controls, which would be necessary after a hard brexit, will increase support for the succession of northern ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.1.	The tightening of border controls, which would be necessary after a hard Brexit, will increase support for the succession of Northern Ireland.	con	A hard Brexit would lead to the return of an enforced border between Northern Ireland and The Republic of Ireland.
this could happen anyway independent of brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.2.	This could happen anyway independent of Brexit.	pro	Sinn Fein has long been calling for reunification of the island of Ireland since well before the EU referendum.
northern ireland voted to remain in the eu by a 10% margin (55-45).	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.3.	Northern Ireland voted to Remain in the EU by a 10% margin (55-45).	con	
the democratic unionist party, the largest party in the northern irish assembly, is opposed to seccession.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.4.	The Democratic Unionist Party, the largest party in the Northern Irish Assembly, is opposed to seccession.	pro	The politics of Ireland are incredibly volatile, there has not been a Government in Northern Ireland since January 2017 due to the collapse of power sharing. Therefore the continuation of the DUP as the major party in Northern Ireland is not guaranteed.
the politics of ireland are incredibly volatile, there has not been a government in northern ireland since january 2017 due to the collapse of power sharing. therefore the continuation of the dup as the major party in northern ireland is not guaranteed.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.4.1.	The politics of Ireland are incredibly volatile, there has not been a Government in Northern Ireland since January 2017 due to the collapse of power sharing. Therefore the continuation of the DUP as the major party in Northern Ireland is not guaranteed.	con	The Unionist Parties (pro-union with the UK) hold only a small plurality over the Nationalist Parties (pro-unification with Southern Ireland) in the Northern Irish Assembly.
the unionist parties (pro-union with the uk) hold only a small plurality over the nationalist parties (pro-unification with southern ireland) in the northern irish assembly.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.4.1.1.	The Unionist Parties (pro-union with the UK) hold only a small plurality over the Nationalist Parties (pro-unification with Southern Ireland) in the Northern Irish Assembly.	con	
even after the brexit vote, support in northern ireland for reunification only stands at 22%.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.5.	Even after the Brexit vote, support in Northern Ireland for reunification only stands at 22%.	pro	While 22 per cent seems a low percentage, what is important is that it was a five-point increase in support for a United Ireland from 17 per cent in 2013. Since 2016 when this poll was taken support has continued to rise.
while 22 per cent seems a low percentage, what is important is that it was a five-point increase in support for a united ireland from 17 per cent in 2013. since 2016 when this poll was taken support has continued to rise.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.5.1.	While 22 per cent seems a low percentage, what is important is that it was a five-point increase in support for a United Ireland from 17 per cent in 2013. Since 2016 when this poll was taken support has continued to rise.	con	In a poll taken in December 2017 a majority in Northern Ireland (51 percent) supported unification under the Irish Republic to remain in the European Union in the event of a “hard” Brexit.
in a poll taken in december 2017 a majority in northern ireland (51 percent) supported unification under the irish republic to remain in the european union in the event of a “hard” brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.5.5.1.1.	In a poll taken in December 2017 a majority in Northern Ireland (51 percent) supported unification under the Irish Republic to remain in the European Union in the event of a “hard” Brexit.	con	
preventing a hard border between northern ireland and the republic of ireland could be incompatible with leaving the customs union.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.6.	Preventing a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland could be incompatible with leaving the Customs Union.	con	This is a solvable problem according to the British government and the former Taoiseach (Prime Minister) of Ireland.
this is a solvable problem according to the british government and the former taoiseach (prime minister) of ireland.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.6.1.	This is a solvable problem according to the British government and the former Taoiseach (Prime Minister) of Ireland.	pro	One possible solution that has been mooted is to introduce technology to manage multinational trade while turning a blind eye to lower-level cross-frontier movement.	If Britain leaves the EU common market a hard Irish border could be avoided if policies were implemented to separate Northern Ireland's market from the rest of the UK.
one possible solution that has been mooted is to introduce technology to manage multinational trade while turning a blind eye to lower-level cross-frontier movement.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.6.1.1.	One possible solution that has been mooted is to introduce technology to manage multinational trade while turning a blind eye to lower-level cross-frontier movement.	pro	"Turning a blind eye" allows the movement of EU immigrants into the UK and vice versa. Brexit was claimed to be about taking back control of our borders. ROI/EU also has the right to controlled migration from the UK of both UK citizens and migrants we allow in too.
"turning a blind eye" allows the movement of eu immigrants into the uk and vice versa. brexit was claimed to be about taking back control of our borders. roi/eu also has the right to controlled migration from the uk of both uk citizens and migrants we allow in too.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.6.1.1.1.	"Turning a blind eye" allows the movement of EU immigrants into the UK and vice versa. Brexit was claimed to be about taking back control of our borders. ROI/EU also has the right to controlled migration from the UK of both UK citizens and migrants we allow in too.	con	
if britain leaves the eu common market a hard irish border could be avoided if policies were implemented to separate northern ireland's market from the rest of the uk.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.3.5.6.1.2.	If Britain leaves the EU common market a hard Irish border could be avoided if policies were implemented to separate Northern Ireland's market from the rest of the UK.	pro	
domestic british politics will be in chaos now whatever happens.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.4.	Domestic British politics will be in chaos now whatever happens.	con	Given the narrow margin of victory, any course taken after the referendum was bound to throw British politics into chaos.	British politics would be even more thrown into chaos by a Hard Brexit, which would create a shortage of food and medicine.
given the narrow margin of victory, any course taken after the referendum was bound to throw british politics into chaos.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.4.1.	Given the narrow margin of victory, any course taken after the referendum was bound to throw British politics into chaos.	con	
british politics would be even more thrown into chaos by a hard brexit, which would create a shortage of food and medicine.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.4.2.	British politics would be even more thrown into chaos by a Hard Brexit, which would create a shortage of food and medicine.	pro	The source above also has a government official saying: 'A significant amount of work and decision-making has gone into the no-deal plans, especially where it relates to ports, and we know that none of this would come to pass.'
the source above also has a government official saying: 'a significant amount of work and decision-making has gone into the no-deal plans, especially where it relates to ports, and we know that none of this would come to pass.'	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.4.2.1.	The source above also has a government official saying: 'A significant amount of work and decision-making has gone into the no-deal plans, especially where it relates to ports, and we know that none of this would come to pass.'	con	An example of "No deal planning" is the infamous "Seabourne Ferries" contract worth £14million granted to a company without ferries with their T&C copied off a takeaway menu. This can probably be assumed to be typical.
an example of "no deal planning" is the infamous "seabourne ferries" contract worth £14million granted to a company without ferries with their t&c copied off a takeaway menu. this can probably be assumed to be typical.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.4.2.1.1.	An example of "No deal planning" is the infamous "Seabourne Ferries" contract worth £14million granted to a company without ferries with their T&C copied off a takeaway menu. This can probably be assumed to be typical.	pro	
fractured and irreconcilable differences over the eu is the cause of the failure of the conservative party, which is the cause of the failure of uk politics and leaving will not address this issue.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.5.	Fractured and irreconcilable differences over the EU is the cause of the failure of the Conservative Party, which is the cause of the failure of uk politics and leaving will not address this issue.	con	This failure started with the holding of the referendum, a decision made by David Cameron. It was not necessary. Politicians frequently break campaign promises because it's impractical not to when it's not practical to completely research an issue before the campaign and yet it's necessary to make a best guess on a wide variety of issues.
this failure started with the holding of the referendum, a decision made by david cameron. it was not necessary. politicians frequently break campaign promises because it's impractical not to when it's not practical to completely research an issue before the campaign and yet it's necessary to make a best guess on a wide variety of issues.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.5.1.	This failure started with the holding of the referendum, a decision made by David Cameron. It was not necessary. Politicians frequently break campaign promises because it's impractical not to when it's not practical to completely research an issue before the campaign and yet it's necessary to make a best guess on a wide variety of issues.	con	
refusing to enact the specific instructions from the electorate may lead to widespread civil disobedience, with negative consequences that dwarf any possible drawbacks from a hard brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.	Refusing to enact the specific instructions from the electorate may lead to widespread civil disobedience, with negative consequences that dwarf any possible drawbacks from a hard Brexit.	pro	Perceived refusal by politicians to listen to voters has led to widespread and longstanding disruption in France through the Yellow Vest movement. Similar protests could become commonplace in the UK.	MPs have warned that delays to Brexit will cause significant anger amongst the public.	MP's have the responsibility to act in the best interests of the country as they see those interests, not to accede to threats of civil disobedience.	A no-deal Brexit will likely lead to violence as well.	The potential impacts as detailed in Operation Yellowhammer are far more likely, as the government's own analysis makes clear, to lead to civil unrest and disobedience.
perceived refusal by politicians to listen to voters has led to widespread and longstanding disruption in france through the yellow vest movement. similar protests could become commonplace in the uk.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.1.	Perceived refusal by politicians to listen to voters has led to widespread and longstanding disruption in France through the Yellow Vest movement. Similar protests could become commonplace in the UK.	pro	The Yellow Vests movement does not appear to be primarily devoted to a failure of French politicians to listen to the voters. Rather its focus is on fuel prices and other mundane issues which boil down to a focus on money. Thus there are no lessons to be drawn regarding the effectiveness of their very different respective motivations.	Protesting against taxes is common, and does not indicate any increased likelihood of violent protests against a very different issue: a government ignoring a referendum decision.	Any similar protests in the UK would be stronger, because they would be protesting a specific failure to listen to clearly voted upon issue (the referendum) rather than a general economic protest about high taxes.
the yellow vests movement does not appear to be primarily devoted to a failure of french politicians to listen to the voters. rather its focus is on fuel prices and other mundane issues which boil down to a focus on money. thus there are no lessons to be drawn regarding the effectiveness of their very different respective motivations.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.1.1.	The Yellow Vests movement does not appear to be primarily devoted to a failure of French politicians to listen to the voters. Rather its focus is on fuel prices and other mundane issues which boil down to a focus on money. Thus there are no lessons to be drawn regarding the effectiveness of their very different respective motivations.	con	
protesting against taxes is common, and does not indicate any increased likelihood of violent protests against a very different issue: a government ignoring a referendum decision.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.1.2.	Protesting against taxes is common, and does not indicate any increased likelihood of violent protests against a very different issue: a government ignoring a referendum decision.	con	There were many protests against taxation in 2018, including major protests in Jordan and Bulgaria.	There have been protests against taxes in the UK.
there were many protests against taxation in 2018, including major protests in jordan and bulgaria.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.1.2.1.	There were many protests against taxation in 2018, including major protests in Jordan and Bulgaria.	con	
there have been protests against taxes in the uk.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.1.2.2.	There have been protests against taxes in the UK.	con	
any similar protests in the uk would be stronger, because they would be protesting a specific failure to listen to clearly voted upon issue (the referendum) rather than a general economic protest about high taxes.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.1.3.	Any similar protests in the UK would be stronger, because they would be protesting a specific failure to listen to clearly voted upon issue (the referendum) rather than a general economic protest about high taxes.	pro	
mps have warned that delays to brexit will cause significant anger amongst the public.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.2.	MPs have warned that delays to Brexit will cause significant anger amongst the public.	pro	Brexit has been delayed. There has been no related violence.
brexit has been delayed. there has been no related violence.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.2.1.	Brexit has been delayed. There has been no related violence.	con	
mp's have the responsibility to act in the best interests of the country as they see those interests, not to accede to threats of civil disobedience.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.3.	MP's have the responsibility to act in the best interests of the country as they see those interests, not to accede to threats of civil disobedience.	con	73.8% of MPs voted Remain.
73.8% of mps voted remain.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.3.1.	73.8% of MPs voted Remain.	con	
a no-deal brexit will likely lead to violence as well.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.	A no-deal Brexit will likely lead to violence as well.	con	Supermarkets are preparing for looting and riots as a result of food shortages following a no-deal Brexit.	The Government has updated emergency evacuation plans in preperation for a no-deal scenario.	According to an EU source secret EU reporting says 'violence is almost inevitable no matter what.' 'They are worried that if the current deal goes through the right-wing will kick off. If there’s no deal everybody will object and kick off. If there’s a second referendum, the right will kick off.'	Police chiefs could be forced to call on the military to tackle civil disorder in the event of a "no-deal" Brexit, according to a leaked document.	The potential impacts as detailed in Operation Yellowhammer are far more likely, as the government's own analysis makes clear, to lead to civil unrest and disobedience.
supermarkets are preparing for looting and riots as a result of food shortages following a no-deal brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.1.	Supermarkets are preparing for looting and riots as a result of food shortages following a no-deal Brexit.	con	
the government has updated emergency evacuation plans in preperation for a no-deal scenario.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.2.	The Government has updated emergency evacuation plans in preperation for a no-deal scenario.	con	
according to an eu source secret eu reporting says 'violence is almost inevitable no matter what.' 'they are worried that if the current deal goes through the right-wing will kick off. if there’s no deal everybody will object and kick off. if there’s a second referendum, the right will kick off.'	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.3.	According to an EU source secret EU reporting says 'violence is almost inevitable no matter what.' 'They are worried that if the current deal goes through the right-wing will kick off. If there’s no deal everybody will object and kick off. If there’s a second referendum, the right will kick off.'	con	
police chiefs could be forced to call on the military to tackle civil disorder in the event of a "no-deal" brexit, according to a leaked document.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.4.	Police chiefs could be forced to call on the military to tackle civil disorder in the event of a "no-deal" Brexit, according to a leaked document.	con	
the potential impacts as detailed in operation yellowhammer are far more likely, as the government's own analysis makes clear, to lead to civil unrest and disobedience.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.5.	The potential impacts as detailed in Operation Yellowhammer are far more likely, as the government's own analysis makes clear, to lead to civil unrest and disobedience.	con	The government's presentation of a base case scenario as "reasonable worst case" is likely to lead to fury if no deal is enacted and the warnings come to pass.
the government's presentation of a base case scenario as "reasonable worst case" is likely to lead to fury if no deal is enacted and the warnings come to pass.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.6.4.5.1.	The government's presentation of a base case scenario as "reasonable worst case" is likely to lead to fury if no deal is enacted and the warnings come to pass.	con	
even just trying to leave the eu has brought down two governments, and may in fact be about to destroy the two-party system which had carried on for a century. that's pretty unstable.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.8.	Even just trying to leave the EU has brought down two governments, and may in fact be about to destroy the two-party system which had carried on for a century. That's pretty unstable.	con	The process has already been the downfall of two Prime Ministers.
the process has already been the downfall of two prime ministers.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.8.1.	The process has already been the downfall of two Prime Ministers.	con	
leaving the eu is a project that is so all-encompassing that it will dominate the activities of the british government for years to come. therefore without a majority-supported clear course of action, brexit is unsustainable in the long term, and even in the short term.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.9.	Leaving the EU is a project that is so all-encompassing that it will dominate the activities of the British government for years to come. Therefore without a majority-supported clear course of action, Brexit is unsustainable in the long term, and even in the short term.	con	The much needed adults' social care green paper continues to be further delayed due to civil servant distraction with brexit issues.
the much needed adults' social care green paper continues to be further delayed due to civil servant distraction with brexit issues.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.9.1.	The much needed adults' social care green paper continues to be further delayed due to civil servant distraction with brexit issues.	con	
deciding to remain in the eu grants ukip a new and powerful antiestablishment narrative of betrayal.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.	Deciding to remain in the EU grants UKIP a new and powerful antiestablishment narrative of betrayal.	pro	Nigel Farage has already made comments contradicting himself on the economic benefits of Brexit. It will also be possible to present an equally powerful narrative of UKIP as being con-artists and betrayers.	UKIP is immensely culturally divisive. Past leaders such as Nigel Farage have made racist, sexist, and xenophobic comments. Current UKIP leader Henry Bolton has stated that under the wrong leadership, UKIP risks becoming the "UK Nazi Party."	UKIP was accused of inciting racial hatred with its controversial "breaking point" posters.	As they considered in 2014, the newly empowered UKIP will lure in many disaffected Tories, making it difficult to form a majority government.	Leaving the EU to just to appease Ukip sympathisers is giving in to ransom. Historically this validates and strengthens their overall narrative. People who disagree with their narrative (on betrayal by the establishment, or anything else) should challenge, rather than condone, it.	The UKIP vote has collapsed, and three leadership elections since the referendum have strained the party's budget.  It is unlikely the party in its current form can regain the type of power it held before 2016.	Immigration was less of an issue in election 2017 than it had been prior to the referendum. This was in part because many Leave supporters believed a Brexit deal would alleviate their concerns about immigration. Staying in the EU will rekindle the divisive politics of the referendum, as these betrayed voters would be drawn back to antiestablishment parties such as UKIP.
nigel farage has already made comments contradicting himself on the economic benefits of brexit. it will also be possible to present an equally powerful narrative of ukip as being con-artists and betrayers.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.1.	Nigel Farage has already made comments contradicting himself on the economic benefits of Brexit. It will also be possible to present an equally powerful narrative of UKIP as being con-artists and betrayers.	con	
ukip is immensely culturally divisive. past leaders such as nigel farage have made racist, sexist, and xenophobic comments. current ukip leader henry bolton has stated that under the wrong leadership, ukip risks becoming the "uk nazi party."	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.2.	UKIP is immensely culturally divisive. Past leaders such as Nigel Farage have made racist, sexist, and xenophobic comments. Current UKIP leader Henry Bolton has stated that under the wrong leadership, UKIP risks becoming the "UK Nazi Party."	pro	UKIP has close ties to extreme far-right, anti-Islam parties in Europe, such as the Italian Lega Nord.	When addressing issues such as immigration, UKIP chooses to frame the debate as a struggle between the "Westminster elite" and the rest of Britain, rather than engaging in substantive debate on whatever the issue is at hand. This makes productive discourse around such matters more difficult.
ukip has close ties to extreme far-right, anti-islam parties in europe, such as the italian lega nord.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.2.1.	UKIP has close ties to extreme far-right, anti-Islam parties in Europe, such as the Italian Lega Nord.	pro	
when addressing issues such as immigration, ukip chooses to frame the debate as a struggle between the "westminster elite" and the rest of britain, rather than engaging in substantive debate on whatever the issue is at hand. this makes productive discourse around such matters more difficult.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.2.2.	When addressing issues such as immigration, UKIP chooses to frame the debate as a struggle between the "Westminster elite" and the rest of Britain, rather than engaging in substantive debate on whatever the issue is at hand. This makes productive discourse around such matters more difficult.	pro	
ukip was accused of inciting racial hatred with its controversial "breaking point" posters.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.3.	UKIP was accused of inciting racial hatred with its controversial "breaking point" posters.	pro	
as they considered in 2014, the newly empowered ukip will lure in many disaffected tories, making it difficult to form a majority government.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.4.	As they considered in 2014, the newly empowered UKIP will lure in many disaffected Tories, making it difficult to form a majority government.	pro	
leaving the eu to just to appease ukip sympathisers is giving in to ransom. historically this validates and strengthens their overall narrative. people who disagree with their narrative (on betrayal by the establishment, or anything else) should challenge, rather than condone, it.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.5.	Leaving the EU to just to appease Ukip sympathisers is giving in to ransom. Historically this validates and strengthens their overall narrative. People who disagree with their narrative (on betrayal by the establishment, or anything else) should challenge, rather than condone, it.	con	
the ukip vote has collapsed, and three leadership elections since the referendum have strained the party's budget.  it is unlikely the party in its current form can regain the type of power it held before 2016.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.6.	The UKIP vote has collapsed, and three leadership elections since the referendum have strained the party's budget.  It is unlikely the party in its current form can regain the type of power it held before 2016.	con	
immigration was less of an issue in election 2017 than it had been prior to the referendum. this was in part because many leave supporters believed a brexit deal would alleviate their concerns about immigration. staying in the eu will rekindle the divisive politics of the referendum, as these betrayed voters would be drawn back to antiestablishment parties such as ukip.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.10.7.	Immigration was less of an issue in election 2017 than it had been prior to the referendum. This was in part because many Leave supporters believed a Brexit deal would alleviate their concerns about immigration. Staying in the EU will rekindle the divisive politics of the referendum, as these betrayed voters would be drawn back to antiestablishment parties such as UKIP.	pro	
opinion polls indicate that the public regrets the brexit vote. a yougov survey, this past october, found that only 42% of respondents think it is right to leave the eu, compared with 47% who think it is wrong. this is a shift since the referendum.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.11.	Opinion polls indicate that the public regrets the Brexit vote. A YouGov survey, this past October, found that only 42% of respondents think it is right to leave the EU, compared with 47% who think it is wrong. This is a shift since the referendum.	con	Out of that 42% who still think it is right to leave the EU, not all of them would support a Hard Brexit.
out of that 42% who still think it is right to leave the eu, not all of them would support a hard brexit.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.13.5.11.1.	Out of that 42% who still think it is right to leave the EU, not all of them would support a Hard Brexit.	con	The WTO governed trade relationship with the EU in the event of no deal would not represent an outcome that the electorate voted for.
if britain wants to trade with the eu, it will still be forced to follow eu trade regulations, but without any input on what those regulations are.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.14.	If Britain wants to trade with the EU, it will still be forced to follow EU trade regulations, but without any input on what those regulations are.	con	It is usually more costly for a company to produce different versions of the same product to satisfy the rules of different export markets. This will mean that, on average, manufacturers wishing to export to the EU will have to produce their products to EU standards as a minimum. As a result, there will be no option for those companies but to follow EU standards and regulations even if the UK decides to change those rules.	Only companies trading with EU will have to follow these regulations and only specific regulations will be applied. The UK is trading with the US but not all US regulations are part of the law in the UK.
it is usually more costly for a company to produce different versions of the same product to satisfy the rules of different export markets. this will mean that, on average, manufacturers wishing to export to the eu will have to produce their products to eu standards as a minimum. as a result, there will be no option for those companies but to follow eu standards and regulations even if the uk decides to change those rules.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.14.1.	It is usually more costly for a company to produce different versions of the same product to satisfy the rules of different export markets. This will mean that, on average, manufacturers wishing to export to the EU will have to produce their products to EU standards as a minimum. As a result, there will be no option for those companies but to follow EU standards and regulations even if the UK decides to change those rules.	con	
only companies trading with eu will have to follow these regulations and only specific regulations will be applied. the uk is trading with the us but not all us regulations are part of the law in the uk.	1_1.11.1.4.1.4.3.14.2.	Only companies trading with EU will have to follow these regulations and only specific regulations will be applied. The UK is trading with the US but not all US regulations are part of the law in the UK.	pro	
in the uk, 32% of mps are women, whereas in the eu 37.4% of meps are women.	1_1.11.1.4.2.	In the UK, 32% of MPs are women, whereas in the EU 37.4% of MEPs are women.	con	
the uks unadjusted gender pay gap is 21%.	1_1.11.1.4.3.	The UKs unadjusted Gender pay gap is 21%.	con	The UKs Gender pay gap is the 4th largest in the EU, and is higher than the EU member state average by 4.8%.	Much of the purported gender pay gap is actually due to part time work being less well paid (per hour) than full time work, and women being disproportionately more likely to do part time work.	It would be hypocritical to leave the EU citing sexism as a reason.
the uks gender pay gap is the 4th largest in the eu, and is higher than the eu member state average by 4.8%.	1_1.11.1.4.3.1.	The UKs Gender pay gap is the 4th largest in the EU, and is higher than the EU member state average by 4.8%.	con	
much of the purported gender pay gap is actually due to part time work being less well paid (per hour) than full time work, and women being disproportionately more likely to do part time work.	1_1.11.1.4.3.2.	Much of the purported gender pay gap is actually due to part time work being less well paid (per hour) than full time work, and women being disproportionately more likely to do part time work.	pro	
it would be hypocritical to leave the eu citing sexism as a reason.	1_1.11.1.4.3.3.	It would be hypocritical to leave the EU citing sexism as a reason.	con	
gender inequality is a global problem, as measured by the undps gender inequality index.	1_1.11.1.4.4.	Gender inequality is a global problem, as measured by the UNDPs Gender Inequality Index.	con	
mep selection is made by the party being voted for by the electorate as elections are conducted using the proportional representation system. this means if someone votes for labour, for example, the labour party allocates the candidate. lack of diversity is therefore down to who the parties put up, rather than the eu as an organisation.	1_1.11.1.6.	MEP selection is made by the party being voted for by the electorate as elections are conducted using the proportional representation system. This means if someone votes for Labour, for example, the Labour Party allocates the candidate. Lack of diversity is therefore down to who the parties put up, rather than the EU as an organisation.	con	
ethnic diversity doesn't just include different skin colours. there are at least 28 (but undoubtedly more) different ethnicities in the commission and parliament.	1_1.11.1.7.	Ethnic diversity doesn't just include different skin colours. There are at least 28 (but undoubtedly more) different ethnicities in the Commission and Parliament.	con	
positive discrimination targets as inherently demanded in the question are in general not a healthy way to target discrimination - as they are necessarily discriminatory themselves. equality of opportunity, not of outcome, should be the goal. this is the path to a meritocracy.	1_1.11.1.8.	Positive Discrimination Targets as inherently demanded in the question are in general not a healthy way to target discrimination - as they are necessarily discriminatory themselves. Equality of opportunity, not of outcome, should be the goal. This is the path to a meritocracy.	con	
8% of mps are from ethnic minority backgrounds, compared to 13% of the general population. the uk itself lacks diversity in representation.	1_1.11.1.9.	8% of MPs are from ethnic minority backgrounds, compared to 13% of the general population. The UK itself lacks diversity in representation.	con	
the eu has been a driver of equality policy in europe.	1_1.11.2.	The EU has been a driver of equality policy in Europe.	con	The EU may in fact protect the citizens of the UK, through legal oversight, from the negative effects of poor policy making or implementation. Vulnerable and marginalised groups have used the European Court of Justice to bring numerous claims against the British Government for human rights abuses.	The UK has introduced many of its equality measures as a result of EU initiatives.	The EU has created many directives which encourage equal opportunities for ethnic minorities across Europe.	The UK consistently has the lowest rates of discrimination across the EU, showing that it is not the EU per se that should take credit for high equality, but rather British governments, courts and society in general. See e.g. figure 5 here	It is the UK that has been a driver of equality policy in the EU, not the reverse.	The UK has strong equality policies.  By being part of a larger community it can push those policies even further, to affect more people.
the uk has introduced many of its equality measures as a result of eu initiatives.	1_1.11.2.2.	The UK has introduced many of its equality measures as a result of EU initiatives.	con	The Equality Act 2010 is the piece of UK legislation which protects people in the workplace and wider society from discrimination on various grounds (including age, disability, race and sexual orientation). It implements four major EU Equal Treatment Directives.	The UK is heavily represented at the EU, and played a key role in the drafting of these equality measures. In the vast majority of cases, the UK would likely have drawn up similar protections had it been outside the EU.	The British Equality and Human Rights Commission claims that EU law has led to changes in UK law, which protect equality and human rights. These include data protection, human trafficking, disability rights, workplace discrimination, and equal pay.
the equality act 2010 is the piece of uk legislation which protects people in the workplace and wider society from discrimination on various grounds (including age, disability, race and sexual orientation). it implements four major eu equal treatment directives.	1_1.11.2.2.1.	The Equality Act 2010 is the piece of UK legislation which protects people in the workplace and wider society from discrimination on various grounds (including age, disability, race and sexual orientation). It implements four major EU Equal Treatment Directives.	con	The UK may have created the same rules as the four "Equal Treatment Directives" by themselves, if the EU had not made them first.
the uk may have created the same rules as the four "equal treatment directives" by themselves, if the eu had not made them first.	1_1.11.2.2.1.1.	The UK may have created the same rules as the four "Equal Treatment Directives" by themselves, if the EU had not made them first.	pro	
the uk is heavily represented at the eu, and played a key role in the drafting of these equality measures. in the vast majority of cases, the uk would likely have drawn up similar protections had it been outside the eu.	1_1.11.2.2.2.	The UK is heavily represented at the EU, and played a key role in the drafting of these equality measures. In the vast majority of cases, the UK would likely have drawn up similar protections had it been outside the EU.	pro	Whilst the British Government seeks to replicate most EU laws for ease of trading, it refuses to protect EU laws on human rights, offering 'basic rights' instead.
whilst the british government seeks to replicate most eu laws for ease of trading, it refuses to protect eu laws on human rights, offering 'basic rights' instead.	1_1.11.2.2.2.1.	Whilst the British Government seeks to replicate most EU laws for ease of trading, it refuses to protect EU laws on human rights, offering 'basic rights' instead.	con	
the british equality and human rights commission claims that eu law has led to changes in uk law, which protect equality and human rights. these include data protection, human trafficking, disability rights, workplace discrimination, and equal pay.	1_1.11.2.2.3.	The British Equality and Human Rights Commission claims that EU law has led to changes in UK law, which protect equality and human rights. These include data protection, human trafficking, disability rights, workplace discrimination, and equal pay.	con	
the uk consistently has the lowest rates of discrimination across the eu, showing that it is not the eu per se that should take credit for high equality, but rather british governments, courts and society in general. see e.g. figure 5 here	1_1.11.2.4.	The UK consistently has the lowest rates of discrimination across the EU, showing that it is not the EU per se that should take credit for high equality, but rather British governments, courts and society in general. See e.g. figure 5 here	pro	
it is the uk that has been a driver of equality policy in the eu, not the reverse.	1_1.11.2.5.	It is the UK that has been a driver of equality policy in the EU, not the reverse.	pro	
the uk has strong equality policies.  by being part of a larger community it can push those policies even further, to affect more people.	1_1.11.2.6.	The UK has strong equality policies.  By being part of a larger community it can push those policies even further, to affect more people.	con	The UK can lead by example just as effectively, if not more effectively, outside the EU where it is not seeking to impose laws on other countries.	Even if it were true that the UK wants to push equality policies further, and given the backlash against political correctness this is unsubstantiated, it is not at all clear that the UK should seek to legally impose those policies on other countries.
the uk can lead by example just as effectively, if not more effectively, outside the eu where it is not seeking to impose laws on other countries.	1_1.11.2.6.1.	The UK can lead by example just as effectively, if not more effectively, outside the EU where it is not seeking to impose laws on other countries.	pro	
even if it were true that the uk wants to push equality policies further, and given the backlash against political correctness this is unsubstantiated, it is not at all clear that the uk should seek to legally impose those policies on other countries.	1_1.11.2.6.2.	Even if it were true that the UK wants to push equality policies further, and given the backlash against political correctness this is unsubstantiated, it is not at all clear that the UK should seek to legally impose those policies on other countries.	pro	
the eu commissions senior management is 35% female, and 37% of middle management is female.	1_1.11.3.	The EU commissions senior management is 35% female, and 37% of middle management is female.	con	Six out of the seven different 'Presidents' of the EU are all white and male.	The EU launched a new “Diversity and Inclusion Charter” in 2017 with promises of fresh action to reach at least 40 per cent women in its management by Nov 1, 2019.	This is higher than the UKs (falling) average of 19% in senior roles, and the global average of 25%.	The UK’s civil service has 40% women in the most senior roles and over 45% in the next most senior roles.	This is higher than the worldwide average for parliaments (22.8% as of June 2016.	This is higher than the Fortune 500 average of Female Senior managers (20.5%.
the eu launched a new “diversity and inclusion charter” in 2017 with promises of fresh action to reach at least 40 per cent women in its management by nov 1, 2019.	1_1.11.3.2.	The EU launched a new “Diversity and Inclusion Charter” in 2017 with promises of fresh action to reach at least 40 per cent women in its management by Nov 1, 2019.	con	
this is higher than the uks (falling) average of 19% in senior roles, and the global average of 25%.	1_1.11.3.3.	This is higher than the UKs (falling) average of 19% in senior roles, and the global average of 25%.	con	Comparing the EU bureaucracy to private companies is inappropriate.	The UK’s civil service has 40% women in the most senior roles and over 45% in the next most senior roles.
comparing the eu bureaucracy to private companies is inappropriate.	1_1.11.3.3.1.	Comparing the EU bureaucracy to private companies is inappropriate.	pro	The EU bureaucracy passes and upholds laws on gender equality, and so should be expected to "practice what it preaches" and achieve higher gender equality than private companies do.
the eu bureaucracy passes and upholds laws on gender equality, and so should be expected to "practice what it preaches" and achieve higher gender equality than private companies do.	1_1.11.3.3.1.1.	The EU bureaucracy passes and upholds laws on gender equality, and so should be expected to "practice what it preaches" and achieve higher gender equality than private companies do.	pro	
the uk’s civil service has 40% women in the most senior roles and over 45% in the next most senior roles.	1_1.11.3.3.2.	The UK’s civil service has 40% women in the most senior roles and over 45% in the next most senior roles.	pro	
this is higher than the worldwide average for parliaments (22.8% as of june 2016.	1_1.11.3.5.	This is higher than the worldwide average for parliaments (22.8% as of June 2016.	con	
this is higher than the fortune 500 average of female senior managers (20.5%.	1_1.11.3.6.	This is higher than the Fortune 500 average of Female Senior managers (20.5%.	con	Comparing the EU bureaucracy to private companies is inappropriate.
the european council (made up of the leaders of the 28 eu member states) is just 10% female (uk, germany, lithuania), whereas the uk cabinet is much more progressive with 30% female members.	1_1.11.4.	The European Council (made up of the leaders of the 28 EU member states) is just 10% female (UK, Germany, Lithuania), whereas the UK cabinet is much more progressive with 30% female members.	pro	The EU parliament, with 37% female MEPs, is more progressive than the house of commons, with only 32% female MPs.	Both are far from exemplars of progressivism, with a lower ratio of women in leadership positions than in backbench positions-- EU / UK
the eu parliament, with 37% female meps, is more progressive than the house of commons, with only 32% female mps.	1_1.11.4.1.	The EU parliament, with 37% female MEPs, is more progressive than the house of commons, with only 32% female MPs.	con	The Conservative party, the biggest single group in the house of commons, has the lowest female representation of all parties excepting the DUP.
the conservative party, the biggest single group in the house of commons, has the lowest female representation of all parties excepting the dup.	1_1.11.4.1.1.	The Conservative party, the biggest single group in the house of commons, has the lowest female representation of all parties excepting the DUP.	con	
both are far from exemplars of progressivism, with a lower ratio of women in leadership positions than in backbench positions-- eu / uk	1_1.11.4.2.	Both are far from exemplars of progressivism, with a lower ratio of women in leadership positions than in backbench positions-- EU / UK	con	
by remaining in the eu, the uk would be able to operate broadly as before but with clear caveats regarding some issues that concern its citizens.	1_1.12.	By remaining in the EU, the UK would be able to operate broadly as before but with clear caveats regarding some issues that concern its citizens.	con	
the united kingdom should remain a member of the european union.	2_1.	The United Kingdom should remain a member of the European Union.	con	Democracy in the EU is seriously impaired.	The citizens of the United Kingdom living abroad will be put into a complicated situation when they lose their work eligibility. This could potentially put thousands of individuals out of work and scrambling for new employment.	A majority of the UK's voters supported Brexit in the 2016 referendum.	Considering the time, money and energy spent by all sides on the UK's departure, staying in the EU seems inappropriate.	Membership of the EU ensures freedom of movement between all the member states.	Leaving the EU could threaten relations between UK countries.	With the biggest opponent of an "ever closer union" gone, the EU would have a much easier way to bring its member states together under the same umbrella.	Remaining in the EU is the only way for the UK to weigh significantly on the international scene and be able to negotiate on equal terms with today's major powers.	Other EU states want the UK to stay.	The EU is a guarantor of peace in Europe by bringing its countries closer together and overcoming the disputes of the past.	Leaving the EU allows Britain to be able to better control immigration flows.	The EU has centralized power and continues to further do so, which means the UK has less control over its own laws and practices.	Brexit presents a risk for the civil society and social structure of the UK.	Only by remaining in the EU would the UK be capable of contributing to EU reform.	Leaving would harm the EU.	Leaving the European Union is likely to be economically catastrophic for the UK.	The European Union is a force for ensuring that the UK and other countries apply internationally agreed legislation.	The UK and the EU share a history and a common culture.
democracy in the eu is seriously impaired.	2_1.1.	Democracy in the EU is seriously impaired.	pro	The directly appointed representatives in the European Parliament are not the source of legislation. They can only approve or reject proposals, but not make them.	The president of the Commission is not directly elected, but is elected by the leaders of each government and with no veto. This is too remote from the population.	Democracy in many places is seriously impaired.	The UK itself isn't overtly democratic either.	The UK is currently governed by a Conservative government that only received support from 29.1% of eligible voters at the last General Election and their level of popular support has continued to fall in recent elections. Democracy is no worse impaired in the EU than it is in the UK.	EU legislation cannot pass without the approval of the democratically elected European Parliament, and at least majority approval by the Council of Ministers (Ministers of the democratically elected governments of member states).
the directly appointed representatives in the european parliament are not the source of legislation. they can only approve or reject proposals, but not make them.	2_1.1.1.	The directly appointed representatives in the European Parliament are not the source of legislation. They can only approve or reject proposals, but not make them.	pro	The directly elected members of parliament in Westminster are not the source of legislation either. it is not the job of the directly appointed members to initiate legislation in most systems; it is their job to amend, improve or reject, and the EU parliament has that power.
the directly elected members of parliament in westminster are not the source of legislation either. it is not the job of the directly appointed members to initiate legislation in most systems; it is their job to amend, improve or reject, and the eu parliament has that power.	2_1.1.1.1.	The directly elected members of parliament in Westminster are not the source of legislation either. it is not the job of the directly appointed members to initiate legislation in most systems; it is their job to amend, improve or reject, and the EU parliament has that power.	con	
the president of the commission is not directly elected, but is elected by the leaders of each government and with no veto. this is too remote from the population.	2_1.1.2.	The president of the Commission is not directly elected, but is elected by the leaders of each government and with no veto. This is too remote from the population.	pro	The prime mister of the UK is not directly elected either, but appointed by the the largest party in parliament with no veto. Yet this mechanism is usually not interpreted as a sign of a democratic deficit in the UK.	The European Commission is the EU's civil service, and the President of the Commission is its head. In the UK, the head of the civil service (cabinet secretary) is also not elected, but appointed by the Prime Minister. So the EU works in this respect very similar to the UK (and many other member governments).	The proposition of the European Council must be approved by the European Parliament, a democratically elected body that represents the interests of the European People.
the prime mister of the uk is not directly elected either, but appointed by the the largest party in parliament with no veto. yet this mechanism is usually not interpreted as a sign of a democratic deficit in the uk.	2_1.1.2.1.	The prime mister of the UK is not directly elected either, but appointed by the the largest party in parliament with no veto. Yet this mechanism is usually not interpreted as a sign of a democratic deficit in the UK.	con	
the european commission is the eu's civil service, and the president of the commission is its head. in the uk, the head of the civil service (cabinet secretary) is also not elected, but appointed by the prime minister. so the eu works in this respect very similar to the uk (and many other member governments).	2_1.1.2.2.	The European Commission is the EU's civil service, and the President of the Commission is its head. In the UK, the head of the civil service (cabinet secretary) is also not elected, but appointed by the Prime Minister. So the EU works in this respect very similar to the UK (and many other member governments).	con	
the proposition of the european council must be approved by the european parliament, a democratically elected body that represents the interests of the european people.	2_1.1.2.3.	The proposition of the European Council must be approved by the European Parliament, a democratically elected body that represents the interests of the European People.	con	
democracy in many places is seriously impaired.	2_1.1.3.	Democracy in many places is seriously impaired.	con	
the uk itself isn't overtly democratic either.	2_1.1.4.	The UK itself isn't overtly democratic either.	con	The UK has an unelected House of Lords.	The UK remains a monarchy.
the uk has an unelected house of lords.	2_1.1.4.1.	The UK has an unelected House of Lords.	con	
the uk remains a monarchy.	2_1.1.4.2.	The UK remains a monarchy.	con	
the uk is currently governed by a conservative government that only received support from 29.1% of eligible voters at the last general election and their level of popular support has continued to fall in recent elections. democracy is no worse impaired in the eu than it is in the uk.	2_1.1.5.	The UK is currently governed by a Conservative government that only received support from 29.1% of eligible voters at the last General Election and their level of popular support has continued to fall in recent elections. Democracy is no worse impaired in the EU than it is in the UK.	con	
eu legislation cannot pass without the approval of the democratically elected european parliament, and at least majority approval by the council of ministers (ministers of the democratically elected governments of member states).	2_1.1.6.	EU legislation cannot pass without the approval of the democratically elected European Parliament, and at least majority approval by the Council of Ministers (Ministers of the democratically elected governments of member states).	con	Although the system is not as democratic as a nation state, it is a compromise which allows Europeans, European governments and the EU itself to find compromise and effectively write and pass legislation that is in the interest of all parties.
although the system is not as democratic as a nation state, it is a compromise which allows europeans, european governments and the eu itself to find compromise and effectively write and pass legislation that is in the interest of all parties.	2_1.1.6.1.	Although the system is not as democratic as a nation state, it is a compromise which allows Europeans, European governments and the EU itself to find compromise and effectively write and pass legislation that is in the interest of all parties.	con	
the citizens of the united kingdom living abroad will be put into a complicated situation when they lose their work eligibility. this could potentially put thousands of individuals out of work and scrambling for new employment.	2_1.2.	The citizens of the United Kingdom living abroad will be put into a complicated situation when they lose their work eligibility. This could potentially put thousands of individuals out of work and scrambling for new employment.	con	
a majority of the uk's voters supported brexit in the 2016 referendum.	2_1.3.	A majority of the UK's voters supported Brexit in the 2016 referendum.	pro	The UK is not leaving the EU because of the referendum but because Parliament voted to enact Article 50. This has been made clear by the Supreme Court.	The people are not well informed enough to make such a decision - this choice should be left up to elected officials.	A 4% margin should not be viewed as a sufficient mandate to fundamentally alter the United Kingdom's relationship with its closest neighbours.	The choice of the English people is against the choice of the people of Scotland or Northern Ireland.	Ignoring the referendum reduces the democratic legitimacy of the UK political process.	The Brexit referendum was of questionable legitimacy.	The referendum had an high turnout of 72%. This is significantly higher than at all general elections since the 1990s and other UK-wide referenda.	Polling now suggests public opinion has changed.	Victory for the Leave campaign was only achieved because of misleading statements and undeliverable promises that were disingenuous.	The referendum's legal status was only meant to be advisory.	The party that ran on the basis of granting the EU Referendum lost its majority in the following general election.
the uk is not leaving the eu because of the referendum but because parliament voted to enact article 50. this has been made clear by the supreme court.	2_1.3.1.	The UK is not leaving the EU because of the referendum but because Parliament voted to enact Article 50. This has been made clear by the Supreme Court.	con	
the people are not well informed enough to make such a decision - this choice should be left up to elected officials.	2_1.3.2.	The people are not well informed enough to make such a decision - this choice should be left up to elected officials.	con	The UK is a parliamentary democracy, not a direct one. The people elect representatives to carry on the business of government on their behalf.	The role of our elected MPs is to think and act carefully in choosing the best course for the country.	Enacting a simple majority vote of the people who disagree with Parliament on this issue weakens Parliament.	It's implicit in a referendum that voters will be less informed than experts. This does not delegitamise the result.	Their majority view over a long period of time has been that membership of the EU is in our interests.	If only the most informed people ought to make a decision, then there is little justification for democracy itself.	Even if the people are considered uninformed, it is still democratically sound to ask for their input in a decision that parliament has to make.
the uk is a parliamentary democracy, not a direct one. the people elect representatives to carry on the business of government on their behalf.	2_1.3.2.1.	The UK is a parliamentary democracy, not a direct one. The people elect representatives to carry on the business of government on their behalf.	con	The Conservative party won an election with the promise of a referendum in their manifesto.	The vast majority of the elected representatives voted to have the referendum.	A majority of elected representatives voted to leave the EU in the withdrawal bill.
the conservative party won an election with the promise of a referendum in their manifesto.	2_1.3.2.1.1.	The Conservative party won an election with the promise of a referendum in their manifesto.	pro	The Conservative manifesto led with Strong Leadership / a Clear Economic Plan / a Brighter More Secure Future. Not everything in a manifesto is delivered.
the conservative manifesto led with strong leadership / a clear economic plan / a brighter more secure future. not everything in a manifesto is delivered.	2_1.3.2.1.1.1.	The Conservative manifesto led with Strong Leadership / a Clear Economic Plan / a Brighter More Secure Future. Not everything in a manifesto is delivered.	con	
the vast majority of the elected representatives voted to have the referendum.	2_1.3.2.1.2.	The vast majority of the elected representatives voted to have the referendum.	pro	
a majority of elected representatives voted to leave the eu in the withdrawal bill.	2_1.3.2.1.3.	A majority of elected representatives voted to leave the EU in the withdrawal bill.	pro	
the role of our elected mps is to think and act carefully in choosing the best course for the country.	2_1.3.2.2.	The role of our elected MPs is to think and act carefully in choosing the best course for the country.	con	
enacting a simple majority vote of the people who disagree with parliament on this issue weakens parliament.	2_1.3.2.3.	Enacting a simple majority vote of the people who disagree with Parliament on this issue weakens Parliament.	con	Decisions with wide-ranging and long-lasting effects, such as constitutional revisions, usually require not only a simple majority but a supermajority.
decisions with wide-ranging and long-lasting effects, such as constitutional revisions, usually require not only a simple majority but a supermajority.	2_1.3.2.3.1.	Decisions with wide-ranging and long-lasting effects, such as constitutional revisions, usually require not only a simple majority but a supermajority.	con	
it's implicit in a referendum that voters will be less informed than experts. this does not delegitamise the result.	2_1.3.2.4.	It's implicit in a referendum that voters will be less informed than experts. This does not delegitamise the result.	pro	There is a difference between being "less informed" than experts and being completely uninformed or misinformed. Briton's understanding and perception of the EU is flawed to a point which makes a rational decision impossible.	It is to be expected that voters will generally not be experts on complex political issues, but the 2016 referendum packaged up a huge bundle of such issues and required a blunt yes/no answer to the question of EU membership. There is nothing wrong with non-experts having the vote, but the referendum campaigns were actively misleading and made claims that were known to be false at the time they were made. This is a deeper failing than lack of expertise.
there is a difference between being "less informed" than experts and being completely uninformed or misinformed. briton's understanding and perception of the eu is flawed to a point which makes a rational decision impossible.	2_1.3.2.4.1.	There is a difference between being "less informed" than experts and being completely uninformed or misinformed. Briton's understanding and perception of the EU is flawed to a point which makes a rational decision impossible.	con	
it is to be expected that voters will generally not be experts on complex political issues, but the 2016 referendum packaged up a huge bundle of such issues and required a blunt yes/no answer to the question of eu membership. there is nothing wrong with non-experts having the vote, but the referendum campaigns were actively misleading and made claims that were known to be false at the time they were made. this is a deeper failing than lack of expertise.	2_1.3.2.4.2.	It is to be expected that voters will generally not be experts on complex political issues, but the 2016 referendum packaged up a huge bundle of such issues and required a blunt yes/no answer to the question of EU membership. There is nothing wrong with non-experts having the vote, but the referendum campaigns were actively misleading and made claims that were known to be false at the time they were made. This is a deeper failing than lack of expertise.	con	
their majority view over a long period of time has been that membership of the eu is in our interests.	2_1.3.2.5.	Their majority view over a long period of time has been that membership of the EU is in our interests.	con	
if only the most informed people ought to make a decision, then there is little justification for democracy itself.	2_1.3.2.6.	If only the most informed people ought to make a decision, then there is little justification for democracy itself.	pro	That is precisely the nature of representative democracy. The "job" of voting on stuff is effectively outsourced to representatives who are themselves accountable to the electorate.
that is precisely the nature of representative democracy. the "job" of voting on stuff is effectively outsourced to representatives who are themselves accountable to the electorate.	2_1.3.2.6.1.	That is precisely the nature of representative democracy. The "job" of voting on stuff is effectively outsourced to representatives who are themselves accountable to the electorate.	con	
even if the people are considered uninformed, it is still democratically sound to ask for their input in a decision that parliament has to make.	2_1.3.2.7.	Even if the people are considered uninformed, it is still democratically sound to ask for their input in a decision that parliament has to make.	pro	The referendum was advisory; the responsibility still lies with the elected officials.
the referendum was advisory; the responsibility still lies with the elected officials.	2_1.3.2.7.1.	The referendum was advisory; the responsibility still lies with the elected officials.	con	
a 4% margin should not be viewed as a sufficient mandate to fundamentally alter the united kingdom's relationship with its closest neighbours.	2_1.3.3.	A 4% margin should not be viewed as a sufficient mandate to fundamentally alter the United Kingdom's relationship with its closest neighbours.	con	The results of previous UK referenda on constitutional issues with smaller margins of victory have been accepted.	More than a quarter of the electorate didn't vote.	Decisions with wide-ranging and long-lasting effects, such as constitutional revisions, usually require not only a simple majority but a supermajority.
the results of previous uk referenda on constitutional issues with smaller margins of victory have been accepted.	2_1.3.3.1.	The results of previous UK referenda on constitutional issues with smaller margins of victory have been accepted.	pro	For example, the result of the Welsh Devolution Referendum 1997 was accepted with 50.3% of votes supporting the Government's proposal.
for example, the result of the welsh devolution referendum 1997 was accepted with 50.3% of votes supporting the government's proposal.	2_1.3.3.1.1.	For example, the result of the Welsh Devolution Referendum 1997 was accepted with 50.3% of votes supporting the Government's proposal.	pro	As 51.9% of votes supporting the proposal to leave the EU exceeds this benchmark, there is sufficient mandate for British Exit from the EU based on past precedent.
as 51.9% of votes supporting the proposal to leave the eu exceeds this benchmark, there is sufficient mandate for british exit from the eu based on past precedent.	2_1.3.3.1.1.1.	As 51.9% of votes supporting the proposal to leave the EU exceeds this benchmark, there is sufficient mandate for British Exit from the EU based on past precedent.	pro	
more than a quarter of the electorate didn't vote.	2_1.3.3.2.	More than a quarter of the electorate didn't vote.	con	The electorate that did not vote were entitled to vote but did not so. It should be assumed that those who did not vote chose to abstain rather than assume they would have voted one way or another if forced to vote.
the electorate that did not vote were entitled to vote but did not so. it should be assumed that those who did not vote chose to abstain rather than assume they would have voted one way or another if forced to vote.	2_1.3.3.2.1.	The electorate that did not vote were entitled to vote but did not so. It should be assumed that those who did not vote chose to abstain rather than assume they would have voted one way or another if forced to vote.	pro	UK citizens oversees, many of them in Europe, were not considered eligible to vote.
uk citizens oversees, many of them in europe, were not considered eligible to vote.	2_1.3.3.2.1.1.	UK citizens oversees, many of them in Europe, were not considered eligible to vote.	con	
the choice of the english people is against the choice of the people of scotland or northern ireland.	2_1.3.4.	The choice of the English people is against the choice of the people of Scotland or Northern Ireland.	con	The referendum reflects all the UK, not separated countries; there is no valid reason to subdivide the result based on the UK's member countries.
the referendum reflects all the uk, not separated countries; there is no valid reason to subdivide the result based on the uk's member countries.	2_1.3.4.1.	The referendum reflects all the UK, not separated countries; there is no valid reason to subdivide the result based on the UK's member countries.	pro	The same argument could be used to justify an EU referendum to override UK’s result.
the same argument could be used to justify an eu referendum to override uk’s result.	2_1.3.4.1.1.	The same argument could be used to justify an EU referendum to override UK’s result.	pro	
ignoring the referendum reduces the democratic legitimacy of the uk political process.	2_1.3.5.	Ignoring the referendum reduces the democratic legitimacy of the UK political process.	pro	The UK is a parliamentary democracy, not a direct one. The people elect representatives to carry on the business of government on their behalf.	If the referendum is ignored the will of the people is thwarted.	The referendum can hardly be ignored, the government may decide not to progress along those advisory lines, but it's been fairly prominently discussed.	There is no suggestion that the referendum should be ignored: it needs to be given full and proper consideration. That doesn't necessarily mean leaving the EU, though.	The referendum's legal status was only meant to be advisory.
if the referendum is ignored the will of the people is thwarted.	2_1.3.5.2.	If the referendum is ignored the will of the people is thwarted.	pro	The will of the people is to have their elected representatives make decisions for them.
the will of the people is to have their elected representatives make decisions for them.	2_1.3.5.2.1.	The will of the people is to have their elected representatives make decisions for them.	con	When Parliament put the decision to the people via a referendum, and the way in which they have continued to act they have changed their role from a representative to a delegate.
when parliament put the decision to the people via a referendum, and the way in which they have continued to act they have changed their role from a representative to a delegate.	2_1.3.5.2.1.1.	When Parliament put the decision to the people via a referendum, and the way in which they have continued to act they have changed their role from a representative to a delegate.	pro	It is not for parliament to change their role.
it is not for parliament to change their role.	2_1.3.5.2.1.1.1.	It is not for parliament to change their role.	con	
the referendum can hardly be ignored, the government may decide not to progress along those advisory lines, but it's been fairly prominently discussed.	2_1.3.5.3.	The referendum can hardly be ignored, the government may decide not to progress along those advisory lines, but it's been fairly prominently discussed.	con	
there is no suggestion that the referendum should be ignored: it needs to be given full and proper consideration. that doesn't necessarily mean leaving the eu, though.	2_1.3.5.4.	There is no suggestion that the referendum should be ignored: it needs to be given full and proper consideration. That doesn't necessarily mean leaving the EU, though.	con	Representatives should be advised (but not driven) by the result of the referendum, there are many other matters they must also consider.	Democracy does not impose the will of the majority, but looks for a dialogue with the minorities to achieve a compromise.	The Ruling Party's manifesto pledged to respect the result of the referendum (p. 73). Supposedly, this refers to an intention to implement the popular preference.
representatives should be advised (but not driven) by the result of the referendum, there are many other matters they must also consider.	2_1.3.5.4.1.	Representatives should be advised (but not driven) by the result of the referendum, there are many other matters they must also consider.	con	
democracy does not impose the will of the majority, but looks for a dialogue with the minorities to achieve a compromise.	2_1.3.5.4.2.	Democracy does not impose the will of the majority, but looks for a dialogue with the minorities to achieve a compromise.	con	
the ruling party's manifesto pledged to respect the result of the referendum (p. 73). supposedly, this refers to an intention to implement the popular preference.	2_1.3.5.4.3.	The Ruling Party's manifesto pledged to respect the result of the referendum (p. 73). Supposedly, this refers to an intention to implement the popular preference.	pro	The ruling party's manifesto also pledged "strong leadership, a clear economic plan and a brighter more secure future", which its conceivable some people voted for too. Since that is diametrically opposed to the farcical situation we have now, it's fair to say that the manifesto assumed remain would win.	The commitment to the referendum is on page 73 of an 81 page manifesto and two of the pages after it are pictures of children and one is big Dave Cameron himself. Its fair to say it was not a central plank of the manifesto and it is impossible to determine how much influence it had in people's voting choices.	The telegraph's summary of the key pledges in the Conservative manifesto didn't mention the referendum at all.
the ruling party's manifesto also pledged "strong leadership, a clear economic plan and a brighter more secure future", which its conceivable some people voted for too. since that is diametrically opposed to the farcical situation we have now, it's fair to say that the manifesto assumed remain would win.	2_1.3.5.4.3.1.	The ruling party's manifesto also pledged "strong leadership, a clear economic plan and a brighter more secure future", which its conceivable some people voted for too. Since that is diametrically opposed to the farcical situation we have now, it's fair to say that the manifesto assumed remain would win.	con	
the commitment to the referendum is on page 73 of an 81 page manifesto and two of the pages after it are pictures of children and one is big dave cameron himself. its fair to say it was not a central plank of the manifesto and it is impossible to determine how much influence it had in people's voting choices.	2_1.3.5.4.3.2.	The commitment to the referendum is on page 73 of an 81 page manifesto and two of the pages after it are pictures of children and one is big Dave Cameron himself. Its fair to say it was not a central plank of the manifesto and it is impossible to determine how much influence it had in people's voting choices.	con	You could argue that the conservatives only went into power due to the manifesto pledge as they attracted many votes that would of gone to UKIP and other parties otherwise. Due to what for those voters was a main pledge. for example: 2015 Party polling	The UK's relations with the EU were one of the most prominent topics during the run-up to the election. This makes it reasonable to believe that the parties' positions on the issue and the referendum were important.
you could argue that the conservatives only went into power due to the manifesto pledge as they attracted many votes that would of gone to ukip and other parties otherwise. due to what for those voters was a main pledge. for example: 2015 party polling	2_1.3.5.4.3.2.1.	You could argue that the conservatives only went into power due to the manifesto pledge as they attracted many votes that would of gone to UKIP and other parties otherwise. Due to what for those voters was a main pledge. for example: 2015 Party polling	pro	To argue that would be to argue that the Conservatives at the time, who clearly never intended the result to go for leave, deceived those people into voting for them, only to have that spectacularly backfire on them.	It is impossible to second-guess the motivations for voting on a manifesto that included a large number of promises, some of them contradictory.	That argument would suggest that the Conservatives took a cynical gamble to scoop up ukip votes in a tight election by promising something they never intended to see through and that, without such a dishonest and reckless move, they would have not secured a majority and there would have been a coalition or hung parliament.
to argue that would be to argue that the conservatives at the time, who clearly never intended the result to go for leave, deceived those people into voting for them, only to have that spectacularly backfire on them.	2_1.3.5.4.3.2.1.1.	To argue that would be to argue that the Conservatives at the time, who clearly never intended the result to go for leave, deceived those people into voting for them, only to have that spectacularly backfire on them.	con	
it is impossible to second-guess the motivations for voting on a manifesto that included a large number of promises, some of them contradictory.	2_1.3.5.4.3.2.1.2.	It is impossible to second-guess the motivations for voting on a manifesto that included a large number of promises, some of them contradictory.	con	
that argument would suggest that the conservatives took a cynical gamble to scoop up ukip votes in a tight election by promising something they never intended to see through and that, without such a dishonest and reckless move, they would have not secured a majority and there would have been a coalition or hung parliament.	2_1.3.5.4.3.2.1.3.	That argument would suggest that the Conservatives took a cynical gamble to scoop up ukip votes in a tight election by promising something they never intended to see through and that, without such a dishonest and reckless move, they would have not secured a majority and there would have been a coalition or hung parliament.	pro	
the uk's relations with the eu were one of the most prominent topics during the run-up to the election. this makes it reasonable to believe that the parties' positions on the issue and the referendum were important.	2_1.3.5.4.3.2.2.	The UK's relations with the EU were one of the most prominent topics during the run-up to the election. This makes it reasonable to believe that the parties' positions on the issue and the referendum were important.	pro	
the telegraph's summary of the key pledges in the conservative manifesto didn't mention the referendum at all.	2_1.3.5.4.3.3.	The telegraph's summary of the key pledges in the Conservative manifesto didn't mention the referendum at all.	con	
the referendum's legal status was only meant to be advisory.	2_1.3.5.5.	The referendum's legal status was only meant to be advisory.	con	The Leaflet published by the government made it quite clear "This is a once in a lifetime decision" and "This is your decision. The government will implement what you decide."	"Advisory" means that the government does not have to comply. But it still ought to enact the will of the people.	The Conservative government's claim to enact any majority decision was just that, a political claim, and not legally binding.	While advisory, the government would have faced heavy backlash if they didn't follow suit.	Parliament must act in the national interest. If the advice of voters turns out to be damaging, government should explain that best endeauvors have failed to produce an acceptable outcome and change course.	The fact the parliament passed the article 50 bill thus mandates the decision.
the leaflet published by the government made it quite clear "this is a once in a lifetime decision" and "this is your decision. the government will implement what you decide."	2_1.3.5.5.1.	The Leaflet published by the government made it quite clear "This is a once in a lifetime decision" and "This is your decision. The government will implement what you decide."	pro	The government promised things that were outside of its direct power to deliver.
the government promised things that were outside of its direct power to deliver.	2_1.3.5.5.1.1.	The government promised things that were outside of its direct power to deliver.	con	
"advisory" means that the government does not have to comply. but it still ought to enact the will of the people.	2_1.3.5.5.2.	"Advisory" means that the government does not have to comply. But it still ought to enact the will of the people.	pro	
the conservative government's claim to enact any majority decision was just that, a political claim, and not legally binding.	2_1.3.5.5.3.	The Conservative government's claim to enact any majority decision was just that, a political claim, and not legally binding.	con	If the government did not act upon the vote then they would be viewed as disingenuous.
if the government did not act upon the vote then they would be viewed as disingenuous.	2_1.3.5.5.3.1.	If the government did not act upon the vote then they would be viewed as disingenuous.	pro	
while advisory, the government would have faced heavy backlash if they didn't follow suit.	2_1.3.5.5.4.	While advisory, the government would have faced heavy backlash if they didn't follow suit.	pro	It is unclear what backlash there would be.	Regardless of the scenario, for example a breakdown of negotiations between the EU and the UK or successful negotiations of a Brexit deal, about half the British people support the idea of a second referendum. This indicates a preference for a public decision about what to do next over a decision made by politicians.
it is unclear what backlash there would be.	2_1.3.5.5.4.1.	It is unclear what backlash there would be.	con	
regardless of the scenario, for example a breakdown of negotiations between the eu and the uk or successful negotiations of a brexit deal, about half the british people support the idea of a second referendum. this indicates a preference for a public decision about what to do next over a decision made by politicians.	2_1.3.5.5.4.2.	Regardless of the scenario, for example a breakdown of negotiations between the EU and the UK or successful negotiations of a Brexit deal, about half the British people support the idea of a second referendum. This indicates a preference for a public decision about what to do next over a decision made by politicians.	pro	
parliament must act in the national interest. if the advice of voters turns out to be damaging, government should explain that best endeauvors have failed to produce an acceptable outcome and change course.	2_1.3.5.5.5.	Parliament must act in the national interest. If the advice of voters turns out to be damaging, government should explain that best endeauvors have failed to produce an acceptable outcome and change course.	con	
the fact the parliament passed the article 50 bill thus mandates the decision.	2_1.3.5.5.6.	The fact the parliament passed the article 50 bill thus mandates the decision.	pro	
the brexit referendum was of questionable legitimacy.	2_1.3.6.	The Brexit referendum was of questionable legitimacy.	con	The result of the referendum was unclear, given that there are at least three "Leave" options that are each antithetical to the other Leave factions.	Since the referendum, revelations have emerged around the role of Cambridge Analytica and the influence of Facebook in the vote, which puts the result in doubt.	Ignoring the referendum reduces the democratic legitimacy of the UK political process.	There are good reasons to believe that the Brexit vote was manipulated by Russian influences. It shouldn't be the foundation for England leaving the EU.	Qualified EU nationals resident in the UK were not allowed to vote. The referendum result is, therefore, very likely not representative of the opinion of the majority of the UK adult population, culturally and economically integrated in the UK at the same level of British citizens.	The referendum had an high turnout of 72%. This is significantly higher than at all general elections since the 1990s and other UK-wide referenda.	At the time of the referendum, it was not clear what form a Brexit would actually take and there was no clear understanding on either side about which promises would be deliverable.	Victory for the Leave campaign was only achieved because of misleading statements and undeliverable promises that were disingenuous.	Vote Leave broke the law.
the result of the referendum was unclear, given that there are at least three "leave" options that are each antithetical to the other leave factions.	2_1.3.6.1.	The result of the referendum was unclear, given that there are at least three "Leave" options that are each antithetical to the other Leave factions.	con	
since the referendum, revelations have emerged around the role of cambridge analytica and the influence of facebook in the vote, which puts the result in doubt.	2_1.3.6.2.	Since the referendum, revelations have emerged around the role of Cambridge Analytica and the influence of Facebook in the vote, which puts the result in doubt.	con	
there are good reasons to believe that the brexit vote was manipulated by russian influences. it shouldn't be the foundation for england leaving the eu.	2_1.3.6.4.	There are good reasons to believe that the Brexit vote was manipulated by Russian influences. It shouldn't be the foundation for England leaving the EU.	con	Manipulating the Brexit vote would have served the Russian goal of separating the UK from Europe, as it was outlined by Alexander Dugin in his book Foundations of Geopolitics.	Research from Oxford University has shown that there was no significant Twitter activity from Russia with an eye on the 2016 referendum.
manipulating the brexit vote would have served the russian goal of separating the uk from europe, as it was outlined by alexander dugin in his book foundations of geopolitics.	2_1.3.6.4.1.	Manipulating the Brexit vote would have served the Russian goal of separating the UK from Europe, as it was outlined by Alexander Dugin in his book Foundations of Geopolitics.	con	
research from oxford university has shown that there was no significant twitter activity from russia with an eye on the 2016 referendum.	2_1.3.6.4.2.	Research from Oxford University has shown that there was no significant Twitter activity from Russia with an eye on the 2016 referendum.	pro	Social media is not the only way that a vote could be meddled with.
social media is not the only way that a vote could be meddled with.	2_1.3.6.4.2.1.	Social media is not the only way that a vote could be meddled with.	con	
qualified eu nationals resident in the uk were not allowed to vote. the referendum result is, therefore, very likely not representative of the opinion of the majority of the uk adult population, culturally and economically integrated in the uk at the same level of british citizens.	2_1.3.6.5.	Qualified EU nationals resident in the UK were not allowed to vote. The referendum result is, therefore, very likely not representative of the opinion of the majority of the UK adult population, culturally and economically integrated in the UK at the same level of British citizens.	con	Arbitrarily speculating the opinions of those ineligible to vote risks undermining the registered opinions of those eligible to vote. Determining who is actually eligible and who is ineligible is a different matter altogether, but once decided should be respected.	If eligible EU nationals wanted to vote in the referendum, they should have acquired British citizenship, as they were entitled to.	Foreign nationals were not allowed to vote in the referendum just as they cannot in a general election, which is entirely appropriate. This is a normal practice in democracies.
arbitrarily speculating the opinions of those ineligible to vote risks undermining the registered opinions of those eligible to vote. determining who is actually eligible and who is ineligible is a different matter altogether, but once decided should be respected.	2_1.3.6.5.1.	Arbitrarily speculating the opinions of those ineligible to vote risks undermining the registered opinions of those eligible to vote. Determining who is actually eligible and who is ineligible is a different matter altogether, but once decided should be respected.	pro	
if eligible eu nationals wanted to vote in the referendum, they should have acquired british citizenship, as they were entitled to.	2_1.3.6.5.2.	If eligible EU nationals wanted to vote in the referendum, they should have acquired British citizenship, as they were entitled to.	pro	It takes more than a year to acquire British citizenship (as one has to hold a certificate of residency, which EU citizens otherwise would not require, for at least 12 months), however there were less than 12 months between the passing of the European Union Referendum Act 2015 and the voter registration deadline for the 2016 referendum. Therefore eligible EU nationals who have already been in the UK for at least 5 years had no chance to acquire British citizenship in time for the referendum.	There are a number of barriers for EU nationals to become British citizens, one of them, being that the cost of an application for British nationality is out of reach for many EU nationals.
it takes more than a year to acquire british citizenship (as one has to hold a certificate of residency, which eu citizens otherwise would not require, for at least 12 months), however there were less than 12 months between the passing of the european union referendum act 2015 and the voter registration deadline for the 2016 referendum. therefore eligible eu nationals who have already been in the uk for at least 5 years had no chance to acquire british citizenship in time for the referendum.	2_1.3.6.5.2.1.	It takes more than a year to acquire British citizenship (as one has to hold a certificate of residency, which EU citizens otherwise would not require, for at least 12 months), however there were less than 12 months between the passing of the European Union Referendum Act 2015 and the voter registration deadline for the 2016 referendum. Therefore eligible EU nationals who have already been in the UK for at least 5 years had no chance to acquire British citizenship in time for the referendum.	con	
there are a number of barriers for eu nationals to become british citizens, one of them, being that the cost of an application for british nationality is out of reach for many eu nationals.	2_1.3.6.5.2.2.	There are a number of barriers for EU nationals to become British citizens, one of them, being that the cost of an application for British nationality is out of reach for many EU nationals.	con	
foreign nationals were not allowed to vote in the referendum just as they cannot in a general election, which is entirely appropriate. this is a normal practice in democracies.	2_1.3.6.5.3.	Foreign nationals were not allowed to vote in the referendum just as they cannot in a general election, which is entirely appropriate. This is a normal practice in democracies.	pro	
the referendum had an high turnout of 72%. this is significantly higher than at all general elections since the 1990s and other uk-wide referenda.	2_1.3.6.6.	The referendum had an high turnout of 72%. This is significantly higher than at all general elections since the 1990s and other UK-wide referenda.	pro	The European Union Referendum Act 2015 did not state any requirement for turnout or majority for the result to be significant. It made no provisions to bind any government to do anything with the result. The Act treated the referendum as just an advisory opinion poll. The result showed that the electorate is pretty evenly split on the issue (within 2%). Many democracies require significant supermajorities for such constitutional changes as stripping fundamental rights from most residents.	There is no significance behind the relative size of this vote in relation to others, as it is comparing different kinds of election.	The share of voters does not legitimize or delegitimize something.	The high turnout did not lead to a significant majority (and therefore a clear mandate).
the european union referendum act 2015 did not state any requirement for turnout or majority for the result to be significant. it made no provisions to bind any government to do anything with the result. the act treated the referendum as just an advisory opinion poll. the result showed that the electorate is pretty evenly split on the issue (within 2%). many democracies require significant supermajorities for such constitutional changes as stripping fundamental rights from most residents.	2_1.3.6.6.1.	The European Union Referendum Act 2015 did not state any requirement for turnout or majority for the result to be significant. It made no provisions to bind any government to do anything with the result. The Act treated the referendum as just an advisory opinion poll. The result showed that the electorate is pretty evenly split on the issue (within 2%). Many democracies require significant supermajorities for such constitutional changes as stripping fundamental rights from most residents.	con	
there is no significance behind the relative size of this vote in relation to others, as it is comparing different kinds of election.	2_1.3.6.6.2.	There is no significance behind the relative size of this vote in relation to others, as it is comparing different kinds of election.	con	Unlike at a general election, there were only two choices, which may have affected voter turnout.
unlike at a general election, there were only two choices, which may have affected voter turnout.	2_1.3.6.6.2.1.	Unlike at a general election, there were only two choices, which may have affected voter turnout.	con	
the share of voters does not legitimize or delegitimize something.	2_1.3.6.6.3.	The share of voters does not legitimize or delegitimize something.	con	
the high turnout did not lead to a significant majority (and therefore a clear mandate).	2_1.3.6.6.4.	The high turnout did not lead to a significant majority (and therefore a clear mandate).	con	
at the time of the referendum, it was not clear what form a brexit would actually take and there was no clear understanding on either side about which promises would be deliverable.	2_1.3.6.7.	At the time of the referendum, it was not clear what form a Brexit would actually take and there was no clear understanding on either side about which promises would be deliverable.	con	The UK can always leave the EU with a hard, no-deal Brexit.
the uk can always leave the eu with a hard, no-deal brexit.	2_1.3.6.7.1.	The UK can always leave the EU with a hard, no-deal Brexit.	pro	
victory for the leave campaign was only achieved because of misleading statements and undeliverable promises that were disingenuous.	2_1.3.6.8.	Victory for the Leave campaign was only achieved because of misleading statements and undeliverable promises that were disingenuous.	con	For instance, the campaign claimed that "£350m/week would be saved through Brexit, which could be funnelled to the NHS. The Leave campaign only admitted that this was false, once the vote had been won.	For instance, the leave campaign argued that "Turkey is imminently joining the EU", leading to further immigration into Britain, which was an unfounded claim.	Leave campaigners advocated membership of the Single Market, as part of the Brexit deal, which is now clearly in question.	By this standard, each and every election and referendum would be invalid as lies and falsehoods are an inevitable part of politics.	Elections are not nullified by a misleading campaign. Part of a campaign is manufacturing promises which may or may not be realisable. The elector must decide which party makes the most compelling argument and is responsible of their choice	Key campaign promises were lies	The Remain campaign also made claims that turned out to be untrue or undeliverable.
for instance, the campaign claimed that "£350m/week would be saved through brexit, which could be funnelled to the nhs. the leave campaign only admitted that this was false, once the vote had been won.	2_1.3.6.8.1.	For instance, the campaign claimed that "£350m/week would be saved through Brexit, which could be funnelled to the NHS. The Leave campaign only admitted that this was false, once the vote had been won.	con	
for instance, the leave campaign argued that "turkey is imminently joining the eu", leading to further immigration into britain, which was an unfounded claim.	2_1.3.6.8.2.	For instance, the leave campaign argued that "Turkey is imminently joining the EU", leading to further immigration into Britain, which was an unfounded claim.	con	
leave campaigners advocated membership of the single market, as part of the brexit deal, which is now clearly in question.	2_1.3.6.8.3.	Leave campaigners advocated membership of the Single Market, as part of the Brexit deal, which is now clearly in question.	con	
by this standard, each and every election and referendum would be invalid as lies and falsehoods are an inevitable part of politics.	2_1.3.6.8.4.	By this standard, each and every election and referendum would be invalid as lies and falsehoods are an inevitable part of politics.	pro	Outright lying is not inevitable; politicians and campaigners can and should be held to a higher standard.	The scale and tactical approach to misrepresenting facts and telling blatent lies has increased in recent years. "Fake News" is certainly not a new idea but misinformation has been weaponised via new media.
outright lying is not inevitable; politicians and campaigners can and should be held to a higher standard.	2_1.3.6.8.4.1.	Outright lying is not inevitable; politicians and campaigners can and should be held to a higher standard.	con	
the scale and tactical approach to misrepresenting facts and telling blatent lies has increased in recent years. "fake news" is certainly not a new idea but misinformation has been weaponised via new media.	2_1.3.6.8.4.2.	The scale and tactical approach to misrepresenting facts and telling blatent lies has increased in recent years. "Fake News" is certainly not a new idea but misinformation has been weaponised via new media.	con	
elections are not nullified by a misleading campaign. part of a campaign is manufacturing promises which may or may not be realisable. the elector must decide which party makes the most compelling argument and is responsible of their choice	2_1.3.6.8.5.	Elections are not nullified by a misleading campaign. Part of a campaign is manufacturing promises which may or may not be realisable. The elector must decide which party makes the most compelling argument and is responsible of their choice	pro	
key campaign promises were lies	2_1.3.6.8.6.	Key campaign promises were lies	con	
the remain campaign also made claims that turned out to be untrue or undeliverable.	2_1.3.6.8.7.	The Remain campaign also made claims that turned out to be untrue or undeliverable.	pro	For instance, George Osborne insisted that there would be an "emergency budget" if Leave won, which was never fulfilled.	Misleading statements and undeliverable statements on the remain side don't invalidate the argument that the leave side won because of misleading statements and undeliverable statements.
for instance, george osborne insisted that there would be an "emergency budget" if leave won, which was never fulfilled.	2_1.3.6.8.7.1.	For instance, George Osborne insisted that there would be an "emergency budget" if Leave won, which was never fulfilled.	pro	Philip Hammond, the current chancellor, continues to reiterate Osbornes warnings in 2018 following the announcement of May's deal that an emergency budget will probably be required if we the UK leaves the EU without a deal.
philip hammond, the current chancellor, continues to reiterate osbornes warnings in 2018 following the announcement of may's deal that an emergency budget will probably be required if we the uk leaves the eu without a deal.	2_1.3.6.8.7.1.1.	Philip Hammond, the current chancellor, continues to reiterate Osbornes warnings in 2018 following the announcement of May's deal that an emergency budget will probably be required if we the UK leaves the EU without a deal.	con	
misleading statements and undeliverable statements on the remain side don't invalidate the argument that the leave side won because of misleading statements and undeliverable statements.	2_1.3.6.8.7.2.	Misleading statements and undeliverable statements on the remain side don't invalidate the argument that the leave side won because of misleading statements and undeliverable statements.	con	
vote leave broke the law.	2_1.3.6.9.	Vote Leave broke the law.	con	When a campaign group breaks the law, it does not invalidate the result of the referendum.
when a campaign group breaks the law, it does not invalidate the result of the referendum.	2_1.3.6.9.1.	When a campaign group breaks the law, it does not invalidate the result of the referendum.	pro	
polling now suggests public opinion has changed.	2_1.3.8.	Polling now suggests public opinion has changed.	con	Polls have been consistently incorrect for a number of years and have lost credibility www.bbc.co.uk	The will of the people fluctuates, sometimes they rather leave and sometimes they rather stay. Future generations did not have a vote.	Upon closer inspection of post-referendum polls, the lead fluctuates a lot and mostly hovers between a 1 and 5% lead for wrong or pro-remain. Pre-referendum polling had similar pro-remain margins which suggests that poll audiences are on average slightly skewed in favour of remain when compared with real votes.
polls have been consistently incorrect for a number of years and have lost credibility www.bbc.co.uk	2_1.3.8.1.	Polls have been consistently incorrect for a number of years and have lost credibility www.bbc.co.uk	pro	
the will of the people fluctuates, sometimes they rather leave and sometimes they rather stay. future generations did not have a vote.	2_1.3.8.2.	The will of the people fluctuates, sometimes they rather leave and sometimes they rather stay. Future generations did not have a vote.	con	
upon closer inspection of post-referendum polls, the lead fluctuates a lot and mostly hovers between a 1 and 5% lead for wrong or pro-remain. pre-referendum polling had similar pro-remain margins which suggests that poll audiences are on average slightly skewed in favour of remain when compared with real votes.	2_1.3.8.3.	Upon closer inspection of post-referendum polls, the lead fluctuates a lot and mostly hovers between a 1 and 5% lead for wrong or pro-remain. Pre-referendum polling had similar pro-remain margins which suggests that poll audiences are on average slightly skewed in favour of remain when compared with real votes.	pro	
the party that ran on the basis of granting the eu referendum lost its majority in the following general election.	2_1.3.11.	The party that ran on the basis of granting the EU Referendum lost its majority in the following general election.	con	Labour, which equally ran on the promise of enacting the referendum result, gained seats in the same election. The election result can therefore not be interpreted as a vote against Brexit.	The loss of a parliamentary majority in an election must be attributable to the whole of the party manifesto, not just to the former stance on an event that has already happened.	The Conservative election campaign made great play of positioning Theresa May as the best leader to deliver Brexit and was clear that the party supported Brexit, so the result can legitimately be seen as significantly, if not wholly, expressive of the electorate's view of Brexit.
labour, which equally ran on the promise of enacting the referendum result, gained seats in the same election. the election result can therefore not be interpreted as a vote against brexit.	2_1.3.11.1.	Labour, which equally ran on the promise of enacting the referendum result, gained seats in the same election. The election result can therefore not be interpreted as a vote against Brexit.	pro	The election was to establish who runs the government and as such should not be looked at as endorsing or undermining a completely different vote.
the election was to establish who runs the government and as such should not be looked at as endorsing or undermining a completely different vote.	2_1.3.11.1.1.	The election was to establish who runs the government and as such should not be looked at as endorsing or undermining a completely different vote.	pro	
the loss of a parliamentary majority in an election must be attributable to the whole of the party manifesto, not just to the former stance on an event that has already happened.	2_1.3.11.2.	The loss of a parliamentary majority in an election must be attributable to the whole of the party manifesto, not just to the former stance on an event that has already happened.	pro	It is highly likely that voters do not read manifestos.
it is highly likely that voters do not read manifestos.	2_1.3.11.2.1.	It is highly likely that voters do not read manifestos.	con	
the conservative election campaign made great play of positioning theresa may as the best leader to deliver brexit and was clear that the party supported brexit, so the result can legitimately be seen as significantly, if not wholly, expressive of the electorate's view of brexit.	2_1.3.11.3.	The Conservative election campaign made great play of positioning Theresa May as the best leader to deliver Brexit and was clear that the party supported Brexit, so the result can legitimately be seen as significantly, if not wholly, expressive of the electorate's view of Brexit.	con	
considering the time, money and energy spent by all sides on the uk's departure, staying in the eu seems inappropriate.	2_1.4.	Considering the time, money and energy spent by all sides on the UK's departure, staying in the EU seems inappropriate.	pro	The more time, money and energy expended on this issue, the clearer it becomes that revoking article 50 is the only way to prevent further unnecessary expenditure of time, money and energy on an ever larger scale.	It is utter madness to pursue a damaging path purely to justify a series of terrible and irresponsible, politically-driven decisions that have led to fantastic wastes of time, money and effort.
the more time, money and energy expended on this issue, the clearer it becomes that revoking article 50 is the only way to prevent further unnecessary expenditure of time, money and energy on an ever larger scale.	2_1.4.1.	The more time, money and energy expended on this issue, the clearer it becomes that revoking article 50 is the only way to prevent further unnecessary expenditure of time, money and energy on an ever larger scale.	con	
it is utter madness to pursue a damaging path purely to justify a series of terrible and irresponsible, politically-driven decisions that have led to fantastic wastes of time, money and effort.	2_1.4.2.	It is utter madness to pursue a damaging path purely to justify a series of terrible and irresponsible, politically-driven decisions that have led to fantastic wastes of time, money and effort.	con	
membership of the eu ensures freedom of movement between all the member states.	2_1.5.	Membership of the EU ensures freedom of movement between all the member states.	con	By closing the borders we are also restricting British youth's opportunities of working and studying abroad, therefore, reducing the capacity for innovation and ultimately reducing the country's competitiveness.	Leaving the EU allows Britain to be able to better control immigration flows.	Students from the UK are able to study in other EU countries through the Erasmus programme	Free movement has not only positive implications. Criminals from poorer parts of the EU see wealthier countries of the union as a better place for their activities. Hence the UK experiences a rapidly increase of the EU nationals in its prisons.
by closing the borders we are also restricting british youth's opportunities of working and studying abroad, therefore, reducing the capacity for innovation and ultimately reducing the country's competitiveness.	2_1.5.1.	By closing the borders we are also restricting British youth's opportunities of working and studying abroad, therefore, reducing the capacity for innovation and ultimately reducing the country's competitiveness.	con	
leaving the eu allows britain to be able to better control immigration flows.	2_1.5.2.	Leaving the EU allows Britain to be able to better control immigration flows.	pro	Data collected and summarised by the OECD suggests that immigration is in most cases positive for the economy. Imposing severe restrictions on immigration is equivalent to restricting economic benefit.	It is harder for someone from outside the EU to migrate to the UK. It would be fairer if migrants from all countries had to go through the same immigration process.	The UK, with an ageing population and fertility rates stalling, will be in desperate need of migrant labour to support its economy over the next 20-50 years.	EU citizens create more demand for service from the NHS.	The UK has ways and means to control migration as a member of the EU that it hasn't made use of so far.
data collected and summarised by the oecd suggests that immigration is in most cases positive for the economy. imposing severe restrictions on immigration is equivalent to restricting economic benefit.	2_1.5.2.1.	Data collected and summarised by the OECD suggests that immigration is in most cases positive for the economy. Imposing severe restrictions on immigration is equivalent to restricting economic benefit.	con	
it is harder for someone from outside the eu to migrate to the uk. it would be fairer if migrants from all countries had to go through the same immigration process.	2_1.5.2.2.	It is harder for someone from outside the EU to migrate to the UK. It would be fairer if migrants from all countries had to go through the same immigration process.	pro	
the uk, with an ageing population and fertility rates stalling, will be in desperate need of migrant labour to support its economy over the next 20-50 years.	2_1.5.2.3.	The UK, with an ageing population and fertility rates stalling, will be in desperate need of migrant labour to support its economy over the next 20-50 years.	con	It is not necessary for the UK to remain in the EU in order to import migrant labour.	Importing migrant labour from outside a common block is more expensive and time consuming.
it is not necessary for the uk to remain in the eu in order to import migrant labour.	2_1.5.2.3.1.	It is not necessary for the UK to remain in the EU in order to import migrant labour.	pro	
importing migrant labour from outside a common block is more expensive and time consuming.	2_1.5.2.3.2.	Importing migrant labour from outside a common block is more expensive and time consuming.	con	
eu citizens create more demand for service from the nhs.	2_1.5.2.4.	EU citizens create more demand for service from the NHS.	pro	It is not fair that EU nationals have the same access to the NHS as British citizens who have paid UK taxes all of their lives. This is 'jumping the queue' as they have only paid UK taxes for a few years.	EU citizens also staff the NHS, with over 10% EU staff in London.	The European Health Insurance Card scheme means that UK citizens can receive healthcare in all participating nations, thus reducing any burden on the NHS of UK citizens who require healthcare while living or travelling in Europe.	EU citizens are, on average, net fiscal contributors to the UK government as a whole. The average UK citizen is, by contrast, a net drain on the fiscal system.
it is not fair that eu nationals have the same access to the nhs as british citizens who have paid uk taxes all of their lives. this is 'jumping the queue' as they have only paid uk taxes for a few years.	2_1.5.2.4.1.	It is not fair that EU nationals have the same access to the NHS as British citizens who have paid UK taxes all of their lives. This is 'jumping the queue' as they have only paid UK taxes for a few years.	pro	Most EU migrants to the UK arrive there in their twenties, at an age when health care requirements are minimal. In contrast, most UK migrants to Spain arrive there after retirement in their sixties, at an age when they start becoming a significant burden to the local healthcare system after not having paid taxes in Spain for many years.	Plenty of UK nationals have not 'paid taxes all of their lives' - the youth, long term / permanently unemployed, many disabled individuals, and severely ill people - and yet it is not socially acceptable to deny NHS treatment to these groups.	This doesn't mean EU nationals have not contributed and are 'jumping the queue'. EU nationals have paid tax in their home country, and because UK nationals who move to another EU country would benefit from their health system, it's a fair exchange.	Part of the point of the NHS is that resources are allocated on the basis of need, not of contribution. If you need treatment, you get it, regardless of how much you have contributed.	The NHS claims for the care an EU citizen receives from the member state via European Health Insurance Card (EHIC).
most eu migrants to the uk arrive there in their twenties, at an age when health care requirements are minimal. in contrast, most uk migrants to spain arrive there after retirement in their sixties, at an age when they start becoming a significant burden to the local healthcare system after not having paid taxes in spain for many years.	2_1.5.2.4.1.1.	Most EU migrants to the UK arrive there in their twenties, at an age when health care requirements are minimal. In contrast, most UK migrants to Spain arrive there after retirement in their sixties, at an age when they start becoming a significant burden to the local healthcare system after not having paid taxes in Spain for many years.	con	
plenty of uk nationals have not 'paid taxes all of their lives' - the youth, long term / permanently unemployed, many disabled individuals, and severely ill people - and yet it is not socially acceptable to deny nhs treatment to these groups.	2_1.5.2.4.1.2.	Plenty of UK nationals have not 'paid taxes all of their lives' - the youth, long term / permanently unemployed, many disabled individuals, and severely ill people - and yet it is not socially acceptable to deny NHS treatment to these groups.	con	
this doesn't mean eu nationals have not contributed and are 'jumping the queue'. eu nationals have paid tax in their home country, and because uk nationals who move to another eu country would benefit from their health system, it's a fair exchange.	2_1.5.2.4.1.3.	This doesn't mean EU nationals have not contributed and are 'jumping the queue'. EU nationals have paid tax in their home country, and because UK nationals who move to another EU country would benefit from their health system, it's a fair exchange.	con	
part of the point of the nhs is that resources are allocated on the basis of need, not of contribution. if you need treatment, you get it, regardless of how much you have contributed.	2_1.5.2.4.1.4.	Part of the point of the NHS is that resources are allocated on the basis of need, not of contribution. If you need treatment, you get it, regardless of how much you have contributed.	con	
the nhs claims for the care an eu citizen receives from the member state via european health insurance card (ehic).	2_1.5.2.4.1.5.	The NHS claims for the care an EU citizen receives from the member state via European Health Insurance Card (EHIC).	con	
eu citizens also staff the nhs, with over 10% eu staff in london.	2_1.5.2.4.2.	EU citizens also staff the NHS, with over 10% EU staff in London.	con	
the european health insurance card scheme means that uk citizens can receive healthcare in all participating nations, thus reducing any burden on the nhs of uk citizens who require healthcare while living or travelling in europe.	2_1.5.2.4.3.	The European Health Insurance Card scheme means that UK citizens can receive healthcare in all participating nations, thus reducing any burden on the NHS of UK citizens who require healthcare while living or travelling in Europe.	con	
eu citizens are, on average, net fiscal contributors to the uk government as a whole. the average uk citizen is, by contrast, a net drain on the fiscal system.	2_1.5.2.4.4.	EU citizens are, on average, net fiscal contributors to the UK government as a whole. The average UK citizen is, by contrast, a net drain on the fiscal system.	con	
the uk has ways and means to control migration as a member of the eu that it hasn't made use of so far.	2_1.5.2.5.	The UK has ways and means to control migration as a member of the EU that it hasn't made use of so far.	con	
students from the uk are able to study in other eu countries through the erasmus programme	2_1.5.3.	Students from the UK are able to study in other EU countries through the Erasmus programme	con	Non EU countries can participate in this program. At the moment they are: the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein, Turkey and Serbia.
non eu countries can participate in this program. at the moment they are: the former yugoslav republic of macedonia, iceland, norway, liechtenstein, turkey and serbia.	2_1.5.3.1.	Non EU countries can participate in this program. At the moment they are: the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein, Turkey and Serbia.	pro	
free movement has not only positive implications. criminals from poorer parts of the eu see wealthier countries of the union as a better place for their activities. hence the uk experiences a rapidly increase of the eu nationals in its prisons.	2_1.5.4.	Free movement has not only positive implications. Criminals from poorer parts of the EU see wealthier countries of the union as a better place for their activities. Hence the UK experiences a rapidly increase of the EU nationals in its prisons.	pro	The article makes intentionally misleading claims. During approximately the same period, the population of EU-born foreigners living in the UK rose by 225% (12.7 million to 28.7 million), so it is unsurprising that the prison population rose by 240%.
the article makes intentionally misleading claims. during approximately the same period, the population of eu-born foreigners living in the uk rose by 225% (12.7 million to 28.7 million), so it is unsurprising that the prison population rose by 240%.	2_1.5.4.1.	The article makes intentionally misleading claims. During approximately the same period, the population of EU-born foreigners living in the UK rose by 225% (12.7 million to 28.7 million), so it is unsurprising that the prison population rose by 240%.	con	The Lithuanian born UK population increased by over 2500%, while the prison population rose by only 1000%.
the lithuanian born uk population increased by over 2500%, while the prison population rose by only 1000%.	2_1.5.4.1.1.	The Lithuanian born UK population increased by over 2500%, while the prison population rose by only 1000%.	con	
leaving the eu could threaten relations between uk countries.	2_1.6.	Leaving the EU could threaten relations between UK countries.	con	There is long been a push for a united Ireland and Scottish Independence. Brexit will be exploited by these camps but they won't go away if the UK remains part of the EU.	If the UK leaves the EU then a border with Ireland would be reintroduced.	Leaving the EU increases the chances of a positive vote on Scottish independence, thus destroying the UK itself.
there is long been a push for a united ireland and scottish independence. brexit will be exploited by these camps but they won't go away if the uk remains part of the eu.	2_1.6.1.	There is long been a push for a united Ireland and Scottish Independence. Brexit will be exploited by these camps but they won't go away if the UK remains part of the EU.	pro	
if the uk leaves the eu then a border with ireland would be reintroduced.	2_1.6.2.	If the UK leaves the EU then a border with Ireland would be reintroduced.	con	Every authority has pledged to not introduce a hard border. The UK government, Irish government and the EU are unanimous in this. Other parties may require one by complaining to the WTO but who would risk peace.	A border with Ireland is not a prerequisite for departure from the EU. Brexit does not guarantee that a hard border will be restored.	The softening of the UK-Ireland border has been a major achievement, and major underpinning, of the Good Friday Agreement process which has brought and consolidated peace in Northern Ireland. Any change to the status of the border is likely to have an impact on the peace process.	It may be that the reintroduction of a border in order to deliver Brexit is, on balance, preferred because of the relative gain from regaining control of our borders even when set against the potential consequences on the UK-Ireland settlement.
every authority has pledged to not introduce a hard border. the uk government, irish government and the eu are unanimous in this. other parties may require one by complaining to the wto but who would risk peace.	2_1.6.2.1.	Every authority has pledged to not introduce a hard border. The UK government, Irish government and the EU are unanimous in this. Other parties may require one by complaining to the WTO but who would risk peace.	pro	These pledges should be seen critically. Various British politicians, among them the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, have showcased a profound lack of knowledge about the political situation.	David Cameron was willing to risk the peace by embarking on a brexit referendum with no clear plan of how th manage the situation in the event of a leave vote.
these pledges should be seen critically. various british politicians, among them the secretary of state for northern ireland, have showcased a profound lack of knowledge about the political situation.	2_1.6.2.1.1.	These pledges should be seen critically. Various British politicians, among them the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, have showcased a profound lack of knowledge about the political situation.	con	
david cameron was willing to risk the peace by embarking on a brexit referendum with no clear plan of how th manage the situation in the event of a leave vote.	2_1.6.2.1.2.	David Cameron was willing to risk the peace by embarking on a brexit referendum with no clear plan of how th manage the situation in the event of a leave vote.	con	
a border with ireland is not a prerequisite for departure from the eu. brexit does not guarantee that a hard border will be restored.	2_1.6.2.2.	A border with Ireland is not a prerequisite for departure from the EU. Brexit does not guarantee that a hard border will be restored.	pro	There is no current acceptable plan to avoid a hard border.	As long as the UK leaves the single market and abandons free movement, which the UK government has stated it intends on doing, then a hard border will be required.	If NI and the UK had different customs terms but no hard border separating them, it would immediately become a trivial smuggling route for anyone seeking to evade either set of terms.	The border with Ireland did not come about because of the EU.	Both the EU and UK have explained their willingness to make a deal and avoid a hard border.
there is no current acceptable plan to avoid a hard border.	2_1.6.2.2.1.	There is no current acceptable plan to avoid a hard border.	con	
as long as the uk leaves the single market and abandons free movement, which the uk government has stated it intends on doing, then a hard border will be required.	2_1.6.2.2.2.	As long as the UK leaves the single market and abandons free movement, which the UK government has stated it intends on doing, then a hard border will be required.	con	Assuming “a need” for a hard border - no one would dare construct it or police it.	If there is no border with a hard brexit, then there is de facto free movement of people in Ireland between the EU and the UK. This result in not achieving the "control our border" brexit objective.
assuming “a need” for a hard border - no one would dare construct it or police it.	2_1.6.2.2.2.1.	Assuming “a need” for a hard border - no one would dare construct it or police it.	pro	The EU (as an institution) does not have the power or prerogative to construct border infrastructure or police the borders of its member states.	No one other than UK PM or Taoiseach has authority to make such decisions, and neither May nor Varadkaw would be keen to do it as this would entail political suicide.
the eu (as an institution) does not have the power or prerogative to construct border infrastructure or police the borders of its member states.	2_1.6.2.2.2.1.1.	The EU (as an institution) does not have the power or prerogative to construct border infrastructure or police the borders of its member states.	pro	
no one other than uk pm or taoiseach has authority to make such decisions, and neither may nor varadkaw would be keen to do it as this would entail political suicide.	2_1.6.2.2.2.1.2.	No one other than UK PM or Taoiseach has authority to make such decisions, and neither May nor Varadkaw would be keen to do it as this would entail political suicide.	pro	
if there is no border with a hard brexit, then there is de facto free movement of people in ireland between the eu and the uk. this result in not achieving the "control our border" brexit objective.	2_1.6.2.2.2.2.	If there is no border with a hard brexit, then there is de facto free movement of people in Ireland between the EU and the UK. This result in not achieving the "control our border" brexit objective.	con	
if ni and the uk had different customs terms but no hard border separating them, it would immediately become a trivial smuggling route for anyone seeking to evade either set of terms.	2_1.6.2.2.3.	If NI and the UK had different customs terms but no hard border separating them, it would immediately become a trivial smuggling route for anyone seeking to evade either set of terms.	con	
the border with ireland did not come about because of the eu.	2_1.6.2.2.4.	The border with Ireland did not come about because of the EU.	pro	The Common Travel Area began in 1923, the year after the Republic of Ireland seceded from the UK. The EU didn't start to come together until 1951.	After the Irish Civil War, the CTA Agreement was complemented by the 1952 Agreement, when all immigration controls were removed, removing the border. But Ireland didn't join the EU until 1973.
the common travel area began in 1923, the year after the republic of ireland seceded from the uk. the eu didn't start to come together until 1951.	2_1.6.2.2.4.1.	The Common Travel Area began in 1923, the year after the Republic of Ireland seceded from the UK. The EU didn't start to come together until 1951.	pro	
after the irish civil war, the cta agreement was complemented by the 1952 agreement, when all immigration controls were removed, removing the border. but ireland didn't join the eu until 1973.	2_1.6.2.2.4.2.	After the Irish Civil War, the CTA Agreement was complemented by the 1952 Agreement, when all immigration controls were removed, removing the border. But Ireland didn't join the EU until 1973.	pro	
both the eu and uk have explained their willingness to make a deal and avoid a hard border.	2_1.6.2.2.5.	Both the EU and UK have explained their willingness to make a deal and avoid a hard border.	pro	Neither have been able to actually agree how to avoid a hard border.
neither have been able to actually agree how to avoid a hard border.	2_1.6.2.2.5.1.	Neither have been able to actually agree how to avoid a hard border.	con	
the softening of the uk-ireland border has been a major achievement, and major underpinning, of the good friday agreement process which has brought and consolidated peace in northern ireland. any change to the status of the border is likely to have an impact on the peace process.	2_1.6.2.3.	The softening of the UK-Ireland border has been a major achievement, and major underpinning, of the Good Friday Agreement process which has brought and consolidated peace in Northern Ireland. Any change to the status of the border is likely to have an impact on the peace process.	con	It is unlikely that, after seeing the benefits of peace the good Friday agreement has brought, either side would seek to militarize if a hard border was introduced. Whilst this step may cause a few issues, all sides want peace and that will prevail.
it is unlikely that, after seeing the benefits of peace the good friday agreement has brought, either side would seek to militarize if a hard border was introduced. whilst this step may cause a few issues, all sides want peace and that will prevail.	2_1.6.2.3.1.	It is unlikely that, after seeing the benefits of peace the good Friday agreement has brought, either side would seek to militarize if a hard border was introduced. Whilst this step may cause a few issues, all sides want peace and that will prevail.	pro	
it may be that the reintroduction of a border in order to deliver brexit is, on balance, preferred because of the relative gain from regaining control of our borders even when set against the potential consequences on the uk-ireland settlement.	2_1.6.2.4.	It may be that the reintroduction of a border in order to deliver Brexit is, on balance, preferred because of the relative gain from regaining control of our borders even when set against the potential consequences on the UK-Ireland settlement.	pro	
leaving the eu increases the chances of a positive vote on scottish independence, thus destroying the uk itself.	2_1.6.3.	Leaving the EU increases the chances of a positive vote on Scottish independence, thus destroying the UK itself.	con	Leaving the EU actually diminishes the likelihood of Scottish independence. A Scotland outside the EU and the UK would be outside both customs unions. As a member of the UK it would at least stay in the one within which it does most of its trade.
leaving the eu actually diminishes the likelihood of scottish independence. a scotland outside the eu and the uk would be outside both customs unions. as a member of the uk it would at least stay in the one within which it does most of its trade.	2_1.6.3.1.	Leaving the EU actually diminishes the likelihood of Scottish independence. A Scotland outside the EU and the UK would be outside both customs unions. As a member of the UK it would at least stay in the one within which it does most of its trade.	pro	
with the biggest opponent of an "ever closer union" gone, the eu would have a much easier way to bring its member states together under the same umbrella.	2_1.7.	With the biggest opponent of an "ever closer union" gone, the EU would have a much easier way to bring its member states together under the same umbrella.	pro	It would be easier to harmonize policy making in the EU since, instead of the current three, only two major actors - Germany and France - would remain.	There has been relatively little further integration since the UK has left the EU.	The UK has a track record of objecting to pushs for deeper military integration.	The UK is not the only country with mixed feelings about further integration. To exclude the UK from the EU on that basis would necessarily mean to exclude other EU countries from the EU.
it would be easier to harmonize policy making in the eu since, instead of the current three, only two major actors - germany and france - would remain.	2_1.7.1.	It would be easier to harmonize policy making in the EU since, instead of the current three, only two major actors - Germany and France - would remain.	pro	
there has been relatively little further integration since the uk has left the eu.	2_1.7.2.	There has been relatively little further integration since the UK has left the EU.	con	
the uk has a track record of objecting to pushs for deeper military integration.	2_1.7.3.	The UK has a track record of objecting to pushs for deeper military integration.	pro	Often this resistance was dropped eventually as was the case with a European military HQ.
often this resistance was dropped eventually as was the case with a european military hq.	2_1.7.3.1.	Often this resistance was dropped eventually as was the case with a European military HQ.	con	This still means that the UK has slown things down.
this still means that the uk has slown things down.	2_1.7.3.1.1.	This still means that the UK has slown things down.	pro	
the uk is not the only country with mixed feelings about further integration. to exclude the uk from the eu on that basis would necessarily mean to exclude other eu countries from the eu.	2_1.7.4.	The UK is not the only country with mixed feelings about further integration. To exclude the UK from the EU on that basis would necessarily mean to exclude other EU countries from the EU.	con	The EU may not further expand its powers without treaty change, which requires unanimous approval by all member states. Hence further integration could be blocked if any member state disagrees	Poland, Hungary and Italy are using euro-skeptic rhetoric at home and abroad. They will oppose further European integration. With the UK leaving the EU, the EU will still face the same opposition to further integration.	There is no other EUrosceptic country in the EU with remotely as much power as the UK.
the eu may not further expand its powers without treaty change, which requires unanimous approval by all member states. hence further integration could be blocked if any member state disagrees	2_1.7.4.1.	The EU may not further expand its powers without treaty change, which requires unanimous approval by all member states. Hence further integration could be blocked if any member state disagrees	pro	
poland, hungary and italy are using euro-skeptic rhetoric at home and abroad. they will oppose further european integration. with the uk leaving the eu, the eu will still face the same opposition to further integration.	2_1.7.4.2.	Poland, Hungary and Italy are using euro-skeptic rhetoric at home and abroad. They will oppose further European integration. With the UK leaving the EU, the EU will still face the same opposition to further integration.	con	
there is no other eurosceptic country in the eu with remotely as much power as the uk.	2_1.7.4.3.	There is no other EUrosceptic country in the EU with remotely as much power as the UK.	pro	
remaining in the eu is the only way for the uk to weigh significantly on the international scene and be able to negotiate on equal terms with today's major powers.	2_1.8.	Remaining in the EU is the only way for the UK to weigh significantly on the international scene and be able to negotiate on equal terms with today's major powers.	con	The EU does not have a collective desire. The influence gained by being a member of the 28 member group is likely to be squandered by the indecision created by 28 differing priorities. The scope of this indecision will vary dependent upon the subject: with trade negotiations it will be increased, but with global issues it may be decreased as priorities are more likely to be aligned.	The UK no longer has the leverage over countries outside Europe that it used to; therefore it will not be able to make deals with those countries that are equally beneficial to both sides.	The UK is not a major power anymore. It's GDP (nominal) is less than a seventh of US GDP (nominal) and almost a fifth China's (nominal).	The UK would have the opportunity to join/form groups with other countries, thus maintaining influence on the global stage.	The UK has more bargaining power as a member of an EU collective than it does individually against significantly larger economies like the US or China.	The UK weighed significantly on the international scene prior to the establishment of the EU. There is no reason to believe it won't in a post-Brexit environment.	Worldwide, the UK is the worlds seventh biggest economy.	The UK, as a member of the EU, would inevitably be drawn into all kinds of conflicts that it might be able to stay from as a non-member.
the eu does not have a collective desire. the influence gained by being a member of the 28 member group is likely to be squandered by the indecision created by 28 differing priorities. the scope of this indecision will vary dependent upon the subject: with trade negotiations it will be increased, but with global issues it may be decreased as priorities are more likely to be aligned.	2_1.8.1.	The EU does not have a collective desire. The influence gained by being a member of the 28 member group is likely to be squandered by the indecision created by 28 differing priorities. The scope of this indecision will vary dependent upon the subject: with trade negotiations it will be increased, but with global issues it may be decreased as priorities are more likely to be aligned.	pro	
the uk no longer has the leverage over countries outside europe that it used to; therefore it will not be able to make deals with those countries that are equally beneficial to both sides.	2_1.8.2.	The UK no longer has the leverage over countries outside Europe that it used to; therefore it will not be able to make deals with those countries that are equally beneficial to both sides.	con	Making mutually beneficial deals with other countries does not require leverage. Those deals are made by virtue of them being mutallly beneficial.	The UK has very good relationships with many counties outside of the EU and the Commonwealth, too. America, Japan, Saudi Arabia.	A lack of relative bargaining power means that even deals the UK manages to make will be of only marginal benefit to them	The UK still has close relations with and the support of the 52 other members of the Commonwealth.
making mutually beneficial deals with other countries does not require leverage. those deals are made by virtue of them being mutallly beneficial.	2_1.8.2.1.	Making mutually beneficial deals with other countries does not require leverage. Those deals are made by virtue of them being mutallly beneficial.	pro	This overtly optimistic idea about the UK's leverage in trade negotiations may be a product of the longing for a past in which the country had more weight, for example as a colonial power.
this overtly optimistic idea about the uk's leverage in trade negotiations may be a product of the longing for a past in which the country had more weight, for example as a colonial power.	2_1.8.2.1.1.	This overtly optimistic idea about the UK's leverage in trade negotiations may be a product of the longing for a past in which the country had more weight, for example as a colonial power.	con	This is illustrated by the fact that Britains state in polls that life before the EU was better - which is when Britain still had an Empire.
this is illustrated by the fact that britains state in polls that life before the eu was better - which is when britain still had an empire.	2_1.8.2.1.1.1.	This is illustrated by the fact that Britains state in polls that life before the EU was better - which is when Britain still had an Empire.	con	Before the UK joined the EU it was "the sick man of Europe", therefore conditions before the UK joined the EU were not good as people referred to in the parent claim have themselves claimed.
before the uk joined the eu it was "the sick man of europe", therefore conditions before the uk joined the eu were not good as people referred to in the parent claim have themselves claimed.	2_1.8.2.1.1.1.1.	Before the UK joined the EU it was "the sick man of Europe", therefore conditions before the UK joined the EU were not good as people referred to in the parent claim have themselves claimed.	con	
the uk has very good relationships with many counties outside of the eu and the commonwealth, too. america, japan, saudi arabia.	2_1.8.2.2.	The UK has very good relationships with many counties outside of the EU and the Commonwealth, too. America, Japan, Saudi Arabia.	pro	The UK's good relationship with Amercia is at least partly due to its value as a link with the EU.
the uk's good relationship with amercia is at least partly due to its value as a link with the eu.	2_1.8.2.2.1.	The UK's good relationship with Amercia is at least partly due to its value as a link with the EU.	con	
a lack of relative bargaining power means that even deals the uk manages to make will be of only marginal benefit to them	2_1.8.2.3.	A lack of relative bargaining power means that even deals the UK manages to make will be of only marginal benefit to them	con	
the uk still has close relations with and the support of the 52 other members of the commonwealth.	2_1.8.2.4.	The UK still has close relations with and the support of the 52 other members of the Commonwealth.	pro	The commonwealth represents 13.74% of the world's GDP, the EU represents 27.87%. Thus, it would be unwise to favor the commonwealth over the EU.
the commonwealth represents 13.74% of the world's gdp, the eu represents 27.87%. thus, it would be unwise to favor the commonwealth over the eu.	2_1.8.2.4.1.	The commonwealth represents 13.74% of the world's GDP, the EU represents 27.87%. Thus, it would be unwise to favor the commonwealth over the EU.	con	
the uk is not a major power anymore. it's gdp (nominal) is less than a seventh of us gdp (nominal) and almost a fifth china's (nominal).	2_1.8.3.	The UK is not a major power anymore. It's GDP (nominal) is less than a seventh of US GDP (nominal) and almost a fifth China's (nominal).	con	
the uk would have the opportunity to join/form groups with other countries, thus maintaining influence on the global stage.	2_1.8.4.	The UK would have the opportunity to join/form groups with other countries, thus maintaining influence on the global stage.	pro	The Japanese Prime Minister has said that the UK could join the Trans-Pacific Partnership.	There has been long-standing support for the establishment of a CANZUK economic bloc involving with Canada, Australia and New Zealand.	Given Canada, Australia and New Zealand's significant geographic distance from the UK, it is reasonable to assume that they will continue to hold their primary economic interests outside the UK (as of now, Canada's most important trading partner is the US, while Australia and NZ are active in the Asia-Pacific market). The UK would be a marginal trading partner for these countries.
the japanese prime minister has said that the uk could join the trans-pacific partnership.	2_1.8.4.1.	The Japanese Prime Minister has said that the UK could join the Trans-Pacific Partnership.	pro	
there has been long-standing support for the establishment of a canzuk economic bloc involving with canada, australia and new zealand.	2_1.8.4.2.	There has been long-standing support for the establishment of a CANZUK economic bloc involving with Canada, Australia and New Zealand.	pro	
given canada, australia and new zealand's significant geographic distance from the uk, it is reasonable to assume that they will continue to hold their primary economic interests outside the uk (as of now, canada's most important trading partner is the us, while australia and nz are active in the asia-pacific market). the uk would be a marginal trading partner for these countries.	2_1.8.4.3.	Given Canada, Australia and New Zealand's significant geographic distance from the UK, it is reasonable to assume that they will continue to hold their primary economic interests outside the UK (as of now, Canada's most important trading partner is the US, while Australia and NZ are active in the Asia-Pacific market). The UK would be a marginal trading partner for these countries.	con	
the uk has more bargaining power as a member of an eu collective than it does individually against significantly larger economies like the us or china.	2_1.8.5.	The UK has more bargaining power as a member of an EU collective than it does individually against significantly larger economies like the US or China.	con	
the uk weighed significantly on the international scene prior to the establishment of the eu. there is no reason to believe it won't in a post-brexit environment.	2_1.8.6.	The UK weighed significantly on the international scene prior to the establishment of the EU. There is no reason to believe it won't in a post-Brexit environment.	pro	A significant amount of change has occurred since and the position of the UK before the EU was established doesn't offer any insight to its future international influence. The UK's prosperity is not a given or a right, it is not part of any natural order. It is naive in the extreme and dangerous to make assumptions about our future on the basis of our history.	Britain joined the European Economic Community (ECC) in 1973, and the British empire is widely acknowledged to have ended in the decades that followed (with the decolonisation of Zimbabwe, constitutional independence for Canada and Australia, etc). It is reasonable to suggest that a country that is no longer a global imperial power is weaker now than it was before.
a significant amount of change has occurred since and the position of the uk before the eu was established doesn't offer any insight to its future international influence. the uk's prosperity is not a given or a right, it is not part of any natural order. it is naive in the extreme and dangerous to make assumptions about our future on the basis of our history.	2_1.8.6.1.	A significant amount of change has occurred since and the position of the UK before the EU was established doesn't offer any insight to its future international influence. The UK's prosperity is not a given or a right, it is not part of any natural order. It is naive in the extreme and dangerous to make assumptions about our future on the basis of our history.	con	
britain joined the european economic community (ecc) in 1973, and the british empire is widely acknowledged to have ended in the decades that followed (with the decolonisation of zimbabwe, constitutional independence for canada and australia, etc). it is reasonable to suggest that a country that is no longer a global imperial power is weaker now than it was before.	2_1.8.6.2.	Britain joined the European Economic Community (ECC) in 1973, and the British empire is widely acknowledged to have ended in the decades that followed (with the decolonisation of Zimbabwe, constitutional independence for Canada and Australia, etc). It is reasonable to suggest that a country that is no longer a global imperial power is weaker now than it was before.	con	
worldwide, the uk is the worlds seventh biggest economy.	2_1.8.7.	Worldwide, the UK is the worlds seventh biggest economy.	pro	
the uk, as a member of the eu, would inevitably be drawn into all kinds of conflicts that it might be able to stay from as a non-member.	2_1.8.8.	The UK, as a member of the EU, would inevitably be drawn into all kinds of conflicts that it might be able to stay from as a non-member.	pro	The EU should be part of the EU, influencing world politics and engaging in the resolution of problems in other countries.	The EU and its member countries are currently involved in half a dozen military missions around the globe.
the eu should be part of the eu, influencing world politics and engaging in the resolution of problems in other countries.	2_1.8.8.1.	The EU should be part of the EU, influencing world politics and engaging in the resolution of problems in other countries.	con	
the eu and its member countries are currently involved in half a dozen military missions around the globe.	2_1.8.8.2.	The EU and its member countries are currently involved in half a dozen military missions around the globe.	pro	
other eu states want the uk to stay.	2_1.9.	Other EU states want the UK to stay.	con	Not all states necessarily agree with this sentiment since they didn't openly speak out.	Leading politicians like Angela Merkel and Emanuel Macron have expressed their openness or desire for the UK to stay.	54% of citizens in 28 member states would like the UK to remain in the EU.	High-ranking EU politicians such as Donald Tusk and Jean-Claude Juncker have expressed their openness for Britain staying.	What other countries want should not determine what the UK does, especially when this is not in the UK's national interest.	Civil society wants the UK to remain as illustrated by the Hug A Brit movement.
not all states necessarily agree with this sentiment since they didn't openly speak out.	2_1.9.1.	Not all states necessarily agree with this sentiment since they didn't openly speak out.	pro	
leading politicians like angela merkel and emanuel macron have expressed their openness or desire for the uk to stay.	2_1.9.2.	Leading politicians like Angela Merkel and Emanuel Macron have expressed their openness or desire for the UK to stay.	con	
54% of citizens in 28 member states would like the uk to remain in the eu.	2_1.9.3.	54% of citizens in 28 member states would like the UK to remain in the EU.	con	There is limited basis for national decision making based on popular opinion polls in other countries.
there is limited basis for national decision making based on popular opinion polls in other countries.	2_1.9.3.1.	There is limited basis for national decision making based on popular opinion polls in other countries.	pro	
high-ranking eu politicians such as donald tusk and jean-claude juncker have expressed their openness for britain staying.	2_1.9.4.	High-ranking EU politicians such as Donald Tusk and Jean-Claude Juncker have expressed their openness for Britain staying.	con	
what other countries want should not determine what the uk does, especially when this is not in the uk's national interest.	2_1.9.5.	What other countries want should not determine what the UK does, especially when this is not in the UK's national interest.	pro	
civil society wants the uk to remain as illustrated by the hug a brit movement.	2_1.9.6.	Civil society wants the UK to remain as illustrated by the Hug A Brit movement.	con	
the eu is a guarantor of peace in europe by bringing its countries closer together and overcoming the disputes of the past.	2_1.10.	The EU is a guarantor of peace in Europe by bringing its countries closer together and overcoming the disputes of the past.	con	Peace in Europe is due to many factors that have little to do with the EU.	The European Economic Community that developed into the European Union is predated by NATO which was formed to combat the Soviet Union's influence, peace in Europe is more likely a product of the Soviet Union functioning as the conciliatory threat. With the fall of the Soviet Union both Russia and China have taken the role.	Since the EU is perceived to take away from countries uniqueness, this leads to polarization, thus increasing the potential for conflict.	Since UK citizens have voted against these gains, it is not important that these gains exist. They are not seen as worth the costs of EU membership.	Europe has enjoyed its longest period of peace since the formation of international confederations such as the EU.	It is highly unlikely that European countries will fight each other merely because they are not members of the same particular group - the EU.	The European Parliament and European Court of Justice provide forums for democratic debate and exchange on European matters which might otherwise or have in the past flared into conflict.	The singular absence of the United Kingdom from the EU probably wouldn't cause conflict in continental Europe.
peace in europe is due to many factors that have little to do with the eu.	2_1.10.1.	Peace in Europe is due to many factors that have little to do with the EU.	pro	Democracies usually don't go to war with each other.	Countries with shared values tend to be allies. The UK shares many values with European countries, regardless of whether they are tied together in a political union or not.	It has been suggested that the atomic bomb has been a big factor in minimizing war. The thought of war using atomic weapons has made countries less likely to have have military conflict.	Trade between countries helps keep peace. America and China are a good example.	Military cooperation in the form of NATO has helped prevent war.	Having a common enemy in Russia has helped European countries be allies rather than enemies.	The EU was unanimously awarded the 2012 Nobel prize for the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights over six decades.	A material war is no longer a sensible option for countries as most of the wealth is in the service economy and not in material possesions. Thus, the EU is not a primary reason that there is peace in Europe.	Peace in Europe is due to many factors. That some of these factors may not have much to do with the EU does not make the EU less necessary for peace, nor are non-EU factors shown to be sufficient in the absence of the EU to keep peace.
democracies usually don't go to war with each other.	2_1.10.1.1.	Democracies usually don't go to war with each other.	pro	
countries with shared values tend to be allies. the uk shares many values with european countries, regardless of whether they are tied together in a political union or not.	2_1.10.1.2.	Countries with shared values tend to be allies. The UK shares many values with European countries, regardless of whether they are tied together in a political union or not.	pro	It can be argued that these shared values partly exist due to decades of cooperation within the EU.
it can be argued that these shared values partly exist due to decades of cooperation within the eu.	2_1.10.1.2.1.	It can be argued that these shared values partly exist due to decades of cooperation within the EU.	con	
it has been suggested that the atomic bomb has been a big factor in minimizing war. the thought of war using atomic weapons has made countries less likely to have have military conflict.	2_1.10.1.3.	It has been suggested that the atomic bomb has been a big factor in minimizing war. The thought of war using atomic weapons has made countries less likely to have have military conflict.	pro	This is debatable in the context of Europe. The only countries with nuclear weapons in Europe are France and the UK. These two haven't been waging war against each other - or even come close - for much longer than they had nuclear weapons.	The idea that atomic weapons make us safer relies upon deterrence theory and Mutually Assured Destruction. Since both the US and Russia have at some point or are still working on means to eliminate the balance of power, it is not atomic weapons that have made war less likely, but the lack of technological progress in developing superior weapons systems.	There have been numerous technical close calls, as well as several political scenarios (Cuba (West Germany where conflict was extremely close and any single one of which may have led to catastrophic destruction.	A prominent argument in the academic field of International Relations is that the presence of nuclear weapons makes the prospect of war so terrible that it deters conflict. Following that logic, nuclear weapons are a guarantor of peace.	There is scepticism regarding deterrence theory.	The number of conflicts between states has been declining throughout the decades since the introduction of nuclear weapons.	There are other theories for reduced conflict.	If nuclear weapons made us safer, they would have been distributed to all nation states.	To be deterred from using nuclear weapons, enemies need to be genuinely concerned that the other side is crazy enough to use theirs. In order for deterrence to work, the US would need to deliberately portray elements of its government as out of control in order to create fear and uncertainty in its political rivals.	In a world where peace and war are increasingly redundant states, judging the impact of atomic weapons by overt war is meaningless.
this is debatable in the context of europe. the only countries with nuclear weapons in europe are france and the uk. these two haven't been waging war against each other - or even come close - for much longer than they had nuclear weapons.	2_1.10.1.3.1.	This is debatable in the context of Europe. The only countries with nuclear weapons in Europe are France and the UK. These two haven't been waging war against each other - or even come close - for much longer than they had nuclear weapons.	con	
the idea that atomic weapons make us safer relies upon deterrence theory and mutually assured destruction. since both the us and russia have at some point or are still working on means to eliminate the balance of power, it is not atomic weapons that have made war less likely, but the lack of technological progress in developing superior weapons systems.	2_1.10.1.3.2.	The idea that atomic weapons make us safer relies upon deterrence theory and Mutually Assured Destruction. Since both the US and Russia have at some point or are still working on means to eliminate the balance of power, it is not atomic weapons that have made war less likely, but the lack of technological progress in developing superior weapons systems.	con	Political unity achieved via diplomacy does not rely on a technological stalemate.	With atomic weapons being neutralised by Mutually Assured Destruction, pending the development of alternative destructive or protective technology, some nations have weaponised disinformation, arguably a far more dangerous weapon.
political unity achieved via diplomacy does not rely on a technological stalemate.	2_1.10.1.3.2.1.	Political unity achieved via diplomacy does not rely on a technological stalemate.	con	
with atomic weapons being neutralised by mutually assured destruction, pending the development of alternative destructive or protective technology, some nations have weaponised disinformation, arguably a far more dangerous weapon.	2_1.10.1.3.2.2.	With atomic weapons being neutralised by Mutually Assured Destruction, pending the development of alternative destructive or protective technology, some nations have weaponised disinformation, arguably a far more dangerous weapon.	con	Political unity is a more effective defence against weaponised disinformation and is the target of such attacks.
political unity is a more effective defence against weaponised disinformation and is the target of such attacks.	2_1.10.1.3.2.2.1.	Political unity is a more effective defence against weaponised disinformation and is the target of such attacks.	con	
there have been numerous technical close calls, as well as several political scenarios (cuba (west germany where conflict was extremely close and any single one of which may have led to catastrophic destruction.	2_1.10.1.3.3.	There have been numerous technical close calls, as well as several political scenarios (Cuba (West Germany where conflict was extremely close and any single one of which may have led to catastrophic destruction.	con	
a prominent argument in the academic field of international relations is that the presence of nuclear weapons makes the prospect of war so terrible that it deters conflict. following that logic, nuclear weapons are a guarantor of peace.	2_1.10.1.3.4.	A prominent argument in the academic field of International Relations is that the presence of nuclear weapons makes the prospect of war so terrible that it deters conflict. Following that logic, nuclear weapons are a guarantor of peace.	pro	Deterrence is a theory only.	There are prominent arguments that Mutually Assured Destruction is incredibly risky, a form of psychological terrorism against a state's own civilian population and completely insane.	Having big guns doesn't make us safer. Talking about our differences makes us safer.
deterrence is a theory only.	2_1.10.1.3.4.1.	Deterrence is a theory only.	con	
there are prominent arguments that mutually assured destruction is incredibly risky, a form of psychological terrorism against a state's own civilian population and completely insane.	2_1.10.1.3.4.2.	There are prominent arguments that Mutually Assured Destruction is incredibly risky, a form of psychological terrorism against a state's own civilian population and completely insane.	con	
having big guns doesn't make us safer. talking about our differences makes us safer.	2_1.10.1.3.4.3.	Having big guns doesn't make us safer. Talking about our differences makes us safer.	con	
there is scepticism regarding deterrence theory.	2_1.10.1.3.5.	There is scepticism regarding deterrence theory.	con	
the number of conflicts between states has been declining throughout the decades since the introduction of nuclear weapons.	2_1.10.1.3.6.	The number of conflicts between states has been declining throughout the decades since the introduction of nuclear weapons.	pro	There is a difference between correlation and causation.	The link in the parent claim lists five causes of a reduction in violence, none of which are nuclear weapons.
there is a difference between correlation and causation.	2_1.10.1.3.6.1.	There is a difference between correlation and causation.	con	
the link in the parent claim lists five causes of a reduction in violence, none of which are nuclear weapons.	2_1.10.1.3.6.2.	The link in the parent claim lists five causes of a reduction in violence, none of which are nuclear weapons.	con	
there are other theories for reduced conflict.	2_1.10.1.3.7.	There are other theories for reduced conflict.	con	
if nuclear weapons made us safer, they would have been distributed to all nation states.	2_1.10.1.3.8.	If nuclear weapons made us safer, they would have been distributed to all nation states.	con	
to be deterred from using nuclear weapons, enemies need to be genuinely concerned that the other side is crazy enough to use theirs. in order for deterrence to work, the us would need to deliberately portray elements of its government as out of control in order to create fear and uncertainty in its political rivals.	2_1.10.1.3.9.	To be deterred from using nuclear weapons, enemies need to be genuinely concerned that the other side is crazy enough to use theirs. In order for deterrence to work, the US would need to deliberately portray elements of its government as out of control in order to create fear and uncertainty in its political rivals.	con	The current incumbent is fulfilling this role with skill and flair.	There is no way for the public to tell whether or not the US is actually out of control - and if it is, then it is, by definition extremely dangerous.	There is no general perception, neither by the public nor by policy makers in other countries, that the US is out of control.
the current incumbent is fulfilling this role with skill and flair.	2_1.10.1.3.9.1.	The current incumbent is fulfilling this role with skill and flair.	con	
there is no way for the public to tell whether or not the us is actually out of control - and if it is, then it is, by definition extremely dangerous.	2_1.10.1.3.9.2.	There is no way for the public to tell whether or not the US is actually out of control - and if it is, then it is, by definition extremely dangerous.	con	
there is no general perception, neither by the public nor by policy makers in other countries, that the us is out of control.	2_1.10.1.3.9.3.	There is no general perception, neither by the public nor by policy makers in other countries, that the US is out of control.	pro	
in a world where peace and war are increasingly redundant states, judging the impact of atomic weapons by overt war is meaningless.	2_1.10.1.3.10.	In a world where peace and war are increasingly redundant states, judging the impact of atomic weapons by overt war is meaningless.	con	
trade between countries helps keep peace. america and china are a good example.	2_1.10.1.4.	Trade between countries helps keep peace. America and China are a good example.	pro	America and China are currently engaged in a trade war.	The EU has helped to increase trade and commerce.
america and china are currently engaged in a trade war.	2_1.10.1.4.1.	America and China are currently engaged in a trade war.	con	Current relations are said to be at their worst since the second World War.
current relations are said to be at their worst since the second world war.	2_1.10.1.4.1.1.	Current relations are said to be at their worst since the second World War.	con	
the eu has helped to increase trade and commerce.	2_1.10.1.4.2.	The EU has helped to increase trade and commerce.	con	
military cooperation in the form of nato has helped prevent war.	2_1.10.1.5.	Military cooperation in the form of NATO has helped prevent war.	pro	
having a common enemy in russia has helped european countries be allies rather than enemies.	2_1.10.1.6.	Having a common enemy in Russia has helped European countries be allies rather than enemies.	pro	
the eu was unanimously awarded the 2012 nobel prize for the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights over six decades.	2_1.10.1.7.	The EU was unanimously awarded the 2012 Nobel prize for the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights over six decades.	con	
a material war is no longer a sensible option for countries as most of the wealth is in the service economy and not in material possesions. thus, the eu is not a primary reason that there is peace in europe.	2_1.10.1.8.	A material war is no longer a sensible option for countries as most of the wealth is in the service economy and not in material possesions. Thus, the EU is not a primary reason that there is peace in Europe.	pro	
peace in europe is due to many factors. that some of these factors may not have much to do with the eu does not make the eu less necessary for peace, nor are non-eu factors shown to be sufficient in the absence of the eu to keep peace.	2_1.10.1.9.	Peace in Europe is due to many factors. That some of these factors may not have much to do with the EU does not make the EU less necessary for peace, nor are non-EU factors shown to be sufficient in the absence of the EU to keep peace.	con	
the european economic community that developed into the european union is predated by nato which was formed to combat the soviet union's influence, peace in europe is more likely a product of the soviet union functioning as the conciliatory threat. with the fall of the soviet union both russia and china have taken the role.	2_1.10.2.	The European Economic Community that developed into the European Union is predated by NATO which was formed to combat the Soviet Union's influence, peace in Europe is more likely a product of the Soviet Union functioning as the conciliatory threat. With the fall of the Soviet Union both Russia and China have taken the role.	pro	
since the eu is perceived to take away from countries uniqueness, this leads to polarization, thus increasing the potential for conflict.	2_1.10.3.	Since the EU is perceived to take away from countries uniqueness, this leads to polarization, thus increasing the potential for conflict.	pro	
since uk citizens have voted against these gains, it is not important that these gains exist. they are not seen as worth the costs of eu membership.	2_1.10.4.	Since UK citizens have voted against these gains, it is not important that these gains exist. They are not seen as worth the costs of EU membership.	pro	Most citizens don't know about the complexities of the EU (1 (2, thus it would be unwise to go purely off of their opinion.	That the UK electorate voted to leave the EU does not indicate that peace isn't worthwhile.
most citizens don't know about the complexities of the eu (1 (2, thus it would be unwise to go purely off of their opinion.	2_1.10.4.1.	Most citizens don't know about the complexities of the EU (1 (2, thus it would be unwise to go purely off of their opinion.	con	This is why we have representative democracy, not referenda.
this is why we have representative democracy, not referenda.	2_1.10.4.1.1.	This is why we have representative democracy, not referenda.	con	
that the uk electorate voted to leave the eu does not indicate that peace isn't worthwhile.	2_1.10.4.2.	That the UK electorate voted to leave the EU does not indicate that peace isn't worthwhile.	con	
europe has enjoyed its longest period of peace since the formation of international confederations such as the eu.	2_1.10.5.	Europe has enjoyed its longest period of peace since the formation of international confederations such as the EU.	con	The EU was given The Nobel Peace Prize in 2012 for their contributions to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe.	It would appear that the rise of right wing nationalist and populist politics is putting a strain on that hard won peace.
the eu was given the nobel peace prize in 2012 for their contributions to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in europe.	2_1.10.5.1.	The EU was given The Nobel Peace Prize in 2012 for their contributions to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe.	con	
it would appear that the rise of right wing nationalist and populist politics is putting a strain on that hard won peace.	2_1.10.5.2.	It would appear that the rise of right wing nationalist and populist politics is putting a strain on that hard won peace.	pro	
it is highly unlikely that european countries will fight each other merely because they are not members of the same particular group - the eu.	2_1.10.6.	It is highly unlikely that European countries will fight each other merely because they are not members of the same particular group - the EU.	pro	Sweden is in the EU and Norway is not - war with either is extremely unlikely and independent of whether they are members of the EU.	The EU is more than just a nominal group - it includes political, legal and economic ties that act as the actual guarantors of peace by making intraeuropean war prohibitively expensive.	And yet history tells us very clearly that this is exactly the reason why European countries have fought in the past. The whole reason for creating the EU was to avoid another war like World War 1 or World War 2.	The EU also acts as a unified power block to deter countries on its edges from destabilising or threatening.	Non-membership of the EU would not be the main cause - there are other reasons why they might end up in conflict with one another and the EU is a mechanism to helps ensure this never happens.
sweden is in the eu and norway is not - war with either is extremely unlikely and independent of whether they are members of the eu.	2_1.10.6.1.	Sweden is in the EU and Norway is not - war with either is extremely unlikely and independent of whether they are members of the EU.	pro	
the eu is more than just a nominal group - it includes political, legal and economic ties that act as the actual guarantors of peace by making intraeuropean war prohibitively expensive.	2_1.10.6.2.	The EU is more than just a nominal group - it includes political, legal and economic ties that act as the actual guarantors of peace by making intraeuropean war prohibitively expensive.	con	
and yet history tells us very clearly that this is exactly the reason why european countries have fought in the past. the whole reason for creating the eu was to avoid another war like world war 1 or world war 2.	2_1.10.6.3.	And yet history tells us very clearly that this is exactly the reason why European countries have fought in the past. The whole reason for creating the EU was to avoid another war like World War 1 or World War 2.	con	The EU functions as an alliance that voids conflicting military alliances among the states of Europe.
the eu functions as an alliance that voids conflicting military alliances among the states of europe.	2_1.10.6.3.1.	The EU functions as an alliance that voids conflicting military alliances among the states of Europe.	con	
the eu also acts as a unified power block to deter countries on its edges from destabilising or threatening.	2_1.10.6.4.	The EU also acts as a unified power block to deter countries on its edges from destabilising or threatening.	con	
non-membership of the eu would not be the main cause - there are other reasons why they might end up in conflict with one another and the eu is a mechanism to helps ensure this never happens.	2_1.10.6.5.	Non-membership of the EU would not be the main cause - there are other reasons why they might end up in conflict with one another and the EU is a mechanism to helps ensure this never happens.	con	
the european parliament and european court of justice provide forums for democratic debate and exchange on european matters which might otherwise or have in the past flared into conflict.	2_1.10.7.	The European Parliament and European Court of Justice provide forums for democratic debate and exchange on European matters which might otherwise or have in the past flared into conflict.	con	The UN holds exactly the same role on the global level yet the conflicts still happen. Rather than explaining peace in Europe (or rather a lack of mayor conflicts apart from the Balkan Wars) through the influence of the EU, it can be explained with the presence of developed democracies and pretty fresh memories of two Worlds Wars.
the un holds exactly the same role on the global level yet the conflicts still happen. rather than explaining peace in europe (or rather a lack of mayor conflicts apart from the balkan wars) through the influence of the eu, it can be explained with the presence of developed democracies and pretty fresh memories of two worlds wars.	2_1.10.7.1.	The UN holds exactly the same role on the global level yet the conflicts still happen. Rather than explaining peace in Europe (or rather a lack of mayor conflicts apart from the Balkan Wars) through the influence of the EU, it can be explained with the presence of developed democracies and pretty fresh memories of two Worlds Wars.	pro	
the singular absence of the united kingdom from the eu probably wouldn't cause conflict in continental europe.	2_1.10.8.	The singular absence of the United Kingdom from the EU probably wouldn't cause conflict in continental Europe.	pro	There remain concerns that it risks sliding back towards conflict in Northern Ireland.
there remain concerns that it risks sliding back towards conflict in northern ireland.	2_1.10.8.1.	There remain concerns that it risks sliding back towards conflict in Northern Ireland.	con	
the eu has centralized power and continues to further do so, which means the uk has less control over its own laws and practices.	2_1.12.	The EU has centralized power and continues to further do so, which means the UK has less control over its own laws and practices.	pro	The main focus of EU centralisation of power is where these powers are needed to make the Single Market work smoothly, i.e. legislation to ensure the free flow of goods, services, money and labour. The Single Market was mainly a UK initiative, pushed particularly by the government of Margaret Thatcher.	Most large countries in the EU pass sovereign powers upwards and downwards.	The EU can impose regulations on countries where domestic politicians refuse to acknowledge and ignore a problem, for example selling toxic fish from the Baltic sea (Sweden) or beef linked to Mad Cow Disease (UK).	Globally, the popular tendency is towards the distribution of power as thinly and widely as possible, which suggests that is what societies want right now.	The EU is making laws uniform for over 300 million disparate people, which is likely to be ineffective as these people lead such different realities in such different contexts.	The EU issues and enforces directives made to serve the interest of the EU citizens. The UK is already struggling to enforce the clean air directives on its own.	The UK is still a member of other international organisations that exert significant influence over how the country is governed - but there is no equivalent demand to leave them on the basis of defending the UK's sovereignty.	Any federal or confederal body involves the surrender of some portion of sovereignty for the advancement of shared purpose.	The EU is incompatible with English Common Law and Constitutional Monarchy. Macarthys Ltd v Smith is an example of the two conflicting. Conflict of constitutional law in the EU concisely explains how the two principles of governance can collide.	The EU's centralization of power takes place in agreement with the member states and its democratically legitimized representatives, and in particular the government ministers in the Council of the European Union.	This is only the case for certain things that have to be done on a larger scale like import tariffs, defense, etc.	By leaving, the UK's courts would regain final say over all their rulings due to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) ceasing to act as their highest court of appeal.	The UK is made up of four countries to which more and more powers are being devolved to. The EU is a union that seeks to increase control over member states. These two stances are largely incompatible.	The UK remains involved in EU-decision making even with deeper integration.	The EU strives to become an "ever closer Union".	Though there may be issues with increased centralisation, a total severance of ties is overkill and is much more destructive than healthy conversation and reformation.	Centralisation has its place. It is necessary to address global issues through cooperation. The EU falls a long way short of global cooperation, but it is a good step in the right direction.	The EU requires that all its member nations be democratic. This restricts the UK's ability to experiment with alternate methods of governance.	The people of the UK retain control over the laws and regulations under which they live since they democratically elect the politicians who make decisions, whether in London or Brussels.
the main focus of eu centralisation of power is where these powers are needed to make the single market work smoothly, i.e. legislation to ensure the free flow of goods, services, money and labour. the single market was mainly a uk initiative, pushed particularly by the government of margaret thatcher.	2_1.12.1.	The main focus of EU centralisation of power is where these powers are needed to make the Single Market work smoothly, i.e. legislation to ensure the free flow of goods, services, money and labour. The Single Market was mainly a UK initiative, pushed particularly by the government of Margaret Thatcher.	con	
most large countries in the eu pass sovereign powers upwards and downwards.	2_1.12.2.	Most large countries in the EU pass sovereign powers upwards and downwards.	con	The UK devolves powers to local authorities, the 4 nations, and upwards to the EU, NATO, Commonwealth and WTO/WHO/UN.
the uk devolves powers to local authorities, the 4 nations, and upwards to the eu, nato, commonwealth and wto/who/un.	2_1.12.2.1.	The UK devolves powers to local authorities, the 4 nations, and upwards to the EU, NATO, Commonwealth and WTO/WHO/UN.	con	
the eu can impose regulations on countries where domestic politicians refuse to acknowledge and ignore a problem, for example selling toxic fish from the baltic sea (sweden) or beef linked to mad cow disease (uk).	2_1.12.3.	The EU can impose regulations on countries where domestic politicians refuse to acknowledge and ignore a problem, for example selling toxic fish from the Baltic sea (Sweden) or beef linked to Mad Cow Disease (UK).	pro	
globally, the popular tendency is towards the distribution of power as thinly and widely as possible, which suggests that is what societies want right now.	2_1.12.4.	Globally, the popular tendency is towards the distribution of power as thinly and widely as possible, which suggests that is what societies want right now.	pro	The rise of bitcoin, social media and localisation/anti-globalisation are all examples of this trend.	Power being distributed more thinly across the population does not seem to correlate with trend for ever increased inequality.
the rise of bitcoin, social media and localisation/anti-globalisation are all examples of this trend.	2_1.12.4.1.	The rise of bitcoin, social media and localisation/anti-globalisation are all examples of this trend.	pro	Bitcoin, social media and localisation/anti-globalisation are different phenomena in substance from the European Union and the organisation of political power among governments. Indeed they could all coexist with a centralised EU - there is nothing intrinsic in those trends that has clear lessons for the future of the EU.	Internet based technologies are not an argument against centralisation. Regardless of how sites appear to be structured, the existence of the consumer internet depends on communications architecture which is heavy centralized and government monitored.
bitcoin, social media and localisation/anti-globalisation are different phenomena in substance from the european union and the organisation of political power among governments. indeed they could all coexist with a centralised eu - there is nothing intrinsic in those trends that has clear lessons for the future of the eu.	2_1.12.4.1.1.	Bitcoin, social media and localisation/anti-globalisation are different phenomena in substance from the European Union and the organisation of political power among governments. Indeed they could all coexist with a centralised EU - there is nothing intrinsic in those trends that has clear lessons for the future of the EU.	con	
internet based technologies are not an argument against centralisation. regardless of how sites appear to be structured, the existence of the consumer internet depends on communications architecture which is heavy centralized and government monitored.	2_1.12.4.1.2.	Internet based technologies are not an argument against centralisation. Regardless of how sites appear to be structured, the existence of the consumer internet depends on communications architecture which is heavy centralized and government monitored.	con	
power being distributed more thinly across the population does not seem to correlate with trend for ever increased inequality.	2_1.12.4.2.	Power being distributed more thinly across the population does not seem to correlate with trend for ever increased inequality.	con	
the eu is making laws uniform for over 300 million disparate people, which is likely to be ineffective as these people lead such different realities in such different contexts.	2_1.12.5.	The EU is making laws uniform for over 300 million disparate people, which is likely to be ineffective as these people lead such different realities in such different contexts.	pro	The US has federal laws that cover more than 300 million people.	Some people inside the UK are just as disparate from each other than they are from people in the EU. A middle class city worker in London would likely relate much more to a middle class city worker in Paris, than they would to a rural Welsh farmer.	The EU only makes certain laws uniform in each member state, not all laws.	The EU is not a federal union. Drafting of legislation is never done without the full participation of directly elected Members of the European Parliament (who represent the diversity of local realities in Europe) and/or the national governments making decisions themselves.	Transposition of EU law into national (or regional) law has always been done by the national / member state authorities and therefore always adapted to specific realities in the various countries of the EU.
the us has federal laws that cover more than 300 million people.	2_1.12.5.1.	The US has federal laws that cover more than 300 million people.	con	
some people inside the uk are just as disparate from each other than they are from people in the eu. a middle class city worker in london would likely relate much more to a middle class city worker in paris, than they would to a rural welsh farmer.	2_1.12.5.2.	Some people inside the UK are just as disparate from each other than they are from people in the EU. A middle class city worker in London would likely relate much more to a middle class city worker in Paris, than they would to a rural Welsh farmer.	con	
the eu only makes certain laws uniform in each member state, not all laws.	2_1.12.5.3.	The EU only makes certain laws uniform in each member state, not all laws.	con	
the eu is not a federal union. drafting of legislation is never done without the full participation of directly elected members of the european parliament (who represent the diversity of local realities in europe) and/or the national governments making decisions themselves.	2_1.12.5.4.	The EU is not a federal union. Drafting of legislation is never done without the full participation of directly elected Members of the European Parliament (who represent the diversity of local realities in Europe) and/or the national governments making decisions themselves.	con	This fact was put on full display when the free trade deal between the EU and Canada (CETA) almost collapsed when Belgium could not sign due to concerns raised by the leaders of the Walloon Region.
this fact was put on full display when the free trade deal between the eu and canada (ceta) almost collapsed when belgium could not sign due to concerns raised by the leaders of the walloon region.	2_1.12.5.4.1.	This fact was put on full display when the free trade deal between the EU and Canada (CETA) almost collapsed when Belgium could not sign due to concerns raised by the leaders of the Walloon Region.	con	
transposition of eu law into national (or regional) law has always been done by the national / member state authorities and therefore always adapted to specific realities in the various countries of the eu.	2_1.12.5.5.	Transposition of EU law into national (or regional) law has always been done by the national / member state authorities and therefore always adapted to specific realities in the various countries of the EU.	con	
the eu issues and enforces directives made to serve the interest of the eu citizens. the uk is already struggling to enforce the clean air directives on its own.	2_1.12.6.	The EU issues and enforces directives made to serve the interest of the EU citizens. The UK is already struggling to enforce the clean air directives on its own.	con	The UK is not struggling hard enough to enforce clean air directives because of government policy decisions.
the uk is not struggling hard enough to enforce clean air directives because of government policy decisions.	2_1.12.6.1.	The UK is not struggling hard enough to enforce clean air directives because of government policy decisions.	pro	
the uk is still a member of other international organisations that exert significant influence over how the country is governed - but there is no equivalent demand to leave them on the basis of defending the uk's sovereignty.	2_1.12.7.	The UK is still a member of other international organisations that exert significant influence over how the country is governed - but there is no equivalent demand to leave them on the basis of defending the UK's sovereignty.	con	Members of the World Trade Organisation, including the UK, are required to abide by the judgements of its dispute resolution panels, even if they require amending or removing trade protection laws.	The UK's defence policy is heavily influenced by NATO.
members of the world trade organisation, including the uk, are required to abide by the judgements of its dispute resolution panels, even if they require amending or removing trade protection laws.	2_1.12.7.1.	Members of the World Trade Organisation, including the UK, are required to abide by the judgements of its dispute resolution panels, even if they require amending or removing trade protection laws.	con	
the uk's defence policy is heavily influenced by nato.	2_1.12.7.2.	The UK's defence policy is heavily influenced by NATO.	con	Members of NATO are expected to adhere to a 2006 agreement to spend a minimum of 2% of their GDP on defence.
members of nato are expected to adhere to a 2006 agreement to spend a minimum of 2% of their gdp on defence.	2_1.12.7.2.1.	Members of NATO are expected to adhere to a 2006 agreement to spend a minimum of 2% of their GDP on defence.	con	
any federal or confederal body involves the surrender of some portion of sovereignty for the advancement of shared purpose.	2_1.12.8.	Any federal or confederal body involves the surrender of some portion of sovereignty for the advancement of shared purpose.	pro	
the eu is incompatible with english common law and constitutional monarchy. macarthys ltd v smith is an example of the two conflicting. conflict of constitutional law in the eu concisely explains how the two principles of governance can collide.	2_1.12.9.	The EU is incompatible with English Common Law and Constitutional Monarchy. Macarthys Ltd v Smith is an example of the two conflicting. Conflict of constitutional law in the EU concisely explains how the two principles of governance can collide.	pro	The cases cited, and the Wikipedia article referenced, do not support the claim that the EU is "incompatible". On the contrary, they demonstrate that there are viable mechanisms to examine and resolve any cases where there is a conflict.
the cases cited, and the wikipedia article referenced, do not support the claim that the eu is "incompatible". on the contrary, they demonstrate that there are viable mechanisms to examine and resolve any cases where there is a conflict.	2_1.12.9.1.	The cases cited, and the Wikipedia article referenced, do not support the claim that the EU is "incompatible". On the contrary, they demonstrate that there are viable mechanisms to examine and resolve any cases where there is a conflict.	con	
the eu's centralization of power takes place in agreement with the member states and its democratically legitimized representatives, and in particular the government ministers in the council of the european union.	2_1.12.10.	The EU's centralization of power takes place in agreement with the member states and its democratically legitimized representatives, and in particular the government ministers in the Council of the European Union.	con	
this is only the case for certain things that have to be done on a larger scale like import tariffs, defense, etc.	2_1.12.11.	This is only the case for certain things that have to be done on a larger scale like import tariffs, defense, etc.	con	
by leaving, the uk's courts would regain final say over all their rulings due to the european court of justice (ecj) ceasing to act as their highest court of appeal.	2_1.12.12.	By leaving, the UK's courts would regain final say over all their rulings due to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) ceasing to act as their highest court of appeal.	pro	Very few cases actually go before the European Court of Justice. European Law is almost always applied by national courts. The European Court of Justice interprets EU law on the request of national judges.	On the flipside, the UK looses the ability to sue EU member states, the institutions or any legal person with sufficient standing in front of the ECJ.	In the current agreement the UK abides to the "common rulebook" of the EU.
very few cases actually go before the european court of justice. european law is almost always applied by national courts. the european court of justice interprets eu law on the request of national judges.	2_1.12.12.1.	Very few cases actually go before the European Court of Justice. European Law is almost always applied by national courts. The European Court of Justice interprets EU law on the request of national judges.	con	
on the flipside, the uk looses the ability to sue eu member states, the institutions or any legal person with sufficient standing in front of the ecj.	2_1.12.12.2.	On the flipside, the UK looses the ability to sue EU member states, the institutions or any legal person with sufficient standing in front of the ECJ.	con	
in the current agreement the uk abides to the "common rulebook" of the eu.	2_1.12.12.3.	In the current agreement the UK abides to the "common rulebook" of the EU.	con	
the uk is made up of four countries to which more and more powers are being devolved to. the eu is a union that seeks to increase control over member states. these two stances are largely incompatible.	2_1.12.13.	The UK is made up of four countries to which more and more powers are being devolved to. The EU is a union that seeks to increase control over member states. These two stances are largely incompatible.	pro	
the uk remains involved in eu-decision making even with deeper integration.	2_1.12.14.	The UK remains involved in EU-decision making even with deeper integration.	con	The UK sends MEPs that vote in the European Parliament.	The UK, as all other countries, has one commissioner that influences draft proposals.	The UK is represented in the Council of Ministers.
the uk sends meps that vote in the european parliament.	2_1.12.14.1.	The UK sends MEPs that vote in the European Parliament.	con	
the uk, as all other countries, has one commissioner that influences draft proposals.	2_1.12.14.2.	The UK, as all other countries, has one commissioner that influences draft proposals.	con	
the uk is represented in the council of ministers.	2_1.12.14.3.	The UK is represented in the Council of Ministers.	con	
the eu strives to become an "ever closer union".	2_1.12.15.	The EU strives to become an "ever closer Union".	pro	
though there may be issues with increased centralisation, a total severance of ties is overkill and is much more destructive than healthy conversation and reformation.	2_1.12.16.	Though there may be issues with increased centralisation, a total severance of ties is overkill and is much more destructive than healthy conversation and reformation.	con	
centralisation has its place. it is necessary to address global issues through cooperation. the eu falls a long way short of global cooperation, but it is a good step in the right direction.	2_1.12.17.	Centralisation has its place. It is necessary to address global issues through cooperation. The EU falls a long way short of global cooperation, but it is a good step in the right direction.	con	With the world being more connected and integrated, with more issues of a global nature, the Integration of the political power is needed as a natural response.
with the world being more connected and integrated, with more issues of a global nature, the integration of the political power is needed as a natural response.	2_1.12.17.1.	With the world being more connected and integrated, with more issues of a global nature, the Integration of the political power is needed as a natural response.	con	
the eu requires that all its member nations be democratic. this restricts the uk's ability to experiment with alternate methods of governance.	2_1.12.18.	The EU requires that all its member nations be democratic. This restricts the UK's ability to experiment with alternate methods of governance.	pro	The people of the UK have almost no desire to give up democracy.	The UK is entirely free to elect non-democratic parties, even if that means the UK is expelled from the EU.
the people of the uk have almost no desire to give up democracy.	2_1.12.18.1.	The people of the UK have almost no desire to give up democracy.	con	
the uk is entirely free to elect non-democratic parties, even if that means the uk is expelled from the eu.	2_1.12.18.2.	The UK is entirely free to elect non-democratic parties, even if that means the UK is expelled from the EU.	con	
the people of the uk retain control over the laws and regulations under which they live since they democratically elect the politicians who make decisions, whether in london or brussels.	2_1.12.19.	The people of the UK retain control over the laws and regulations under which they live since they democratically elect the politicians who make decisions, whether in London or Brussels.	con	
brexit presents a risk for the civil society and social structure of the uk.	2_1.13.	Brexit presents a risk for the civil society and social structure of the UK.	con	There are many countries not in the EU which have civil society and a good social structure.	Leaving the EU would be a threat to the rights of workers in the UK.	The EU treaties include the Charter of Fundamental Rights, enforced by an independent multi-national court accessible to all citizens and residents.	The UK's civil society and democracy were created for much longer and have far richer heritage that the ones of the EU. Revoking a membership in the international organization will have no influence for them at all.
there are many countries not in the eu which have civil society and a good social structure.	2_1.13.1.	There are many countries not in the EU which have civil society and a good social structure.	pro	Norway is not in the EU, though is closely linked and has a high Human Development Index and Happiness Index.	The US is not closely linked to the EU but still has a very high Human Development Index. Membership of the EU is not a necessary condition for a country to thrive.	Countries that were never members of the EU cannot be compared to the UK as they never left the EU and experienced the corresponding impact on their societies.
norway is not in the eu, though is closely linked and has a high human development index and happiness index.	2_1.13.1.1.	Norway is not in the EU, though is closely linked and has a high Human Development Index and Happiness Index.	pro	Norway never joined the EU, having voted not to in 1994, and so has never exited the EU.
norway never joined the eu, having voted not to in 1994, and so has never exited the eu.	2_1.13.1.1.1.	Norway never joined the EU, having voted not to in 1994, and so has never exited the EU.	con	
the us is not closely linked to the eu but still has a very high human development index. membership of the eu is not a necessary condition for a country to thrive.	2_1.13.1.2.	The US is not closely linked to the EU but still has a very high Human Development Index. Membership of the EU is not a necessary condition for a country to thrive.	pro	The US was never in the EU and so has never left the EU.
the us was never in the eu and so has never left the eu.	2_1.13.1.2.1.	The US was never in the EU and so has never left the EU.	con	
countries that were never members of the eu cannot be compared to the uk as they never left the eu and experienced the corresponding impact on their societies.	2_1.13.1.3.	Countries that were never members of the EU cannot be compared to the UK as they never left the EU and experienced the corresponding impact on their societies.	con	
leaving the eu would be a threat to the rights of workers in the uk.	2_1.13.2.	Leaving the EU would be a threat to the rights of workers in the UK.	con	The UK is a democracy. Workers in the UK can vote for politicians who will improve their rights. Membership of the EU is not required in order to improve workers' rights.
the uk is a democracy. workers in the uk can vote for politicians who will improve their rights. membership of the eu is not required in order to improve workers' rights.	2_1.13.2.1.	The UK is a democracy. Workers in the UK can vote for politicians who will improve their rights. Membership of the EU is not required in order to improve workers' rights.	pro	
the eu treaties include the charter of fundamental rights, enforced by an independent multi-national court accessible to all citizens and residents.	2_1.13.3.	The EU treaties include the Charter of Fundamental Rights, enforced by an independent multi-national court accessible to all citizens and residents.	con	The UK is a signatory of the EHCR and will remain so after Brexit, so there is little change and no real threat to human rights.	This does not apply to the UK or Poland. Both countries have an opt-out on the power of the ECJ with respect to citizens’s rights.
the uk is a signatory of the ehcr and will remain so after brexit, so there is little change and no real threat to human rights.	2_1.13.3.1.	The UK is a signatory of the EHCR and will remain so after Brexit, so there is little change and no real threat to human rights.	pro	
this does not apply to the uk or poland. both countries have an opt-out on the power of the ecj with respect to citizens’s rights.	2_1.13.3.2.	This does not apply to the UK or Poland. Both countries have an opt-out on the power of the ECJ with respect to citizens’s rights.	pro	
the uk's civil society and democracy were created for much longer and have far richer heritage that the ones of the eu. revoking a membership in the international organization will have no influence for them at all.	2_1.13.4.	The UK's civil society and democracy were created for much longer and have far richer heritage that the ones of the EU. Revoking a membership in the international organization will have no influence for them at all.	pro	The UK has, over a period of 40 years, entwined its civil society and economy with that of its European neighbours. What it did before this period of harmonisation is not relevant to where it is now. Emerging rapidly from such carefully constructed relationships is a risk, and one that is unprecedented.
the uk has, over a period of 40 years, entwined its civil society and economy with that of its european neighbours. what it did before this period of harmonisation is not relevant to where it is now. emerging rapidly from such carefully constructed relationships is a risk, and one that is unprecedented.	2_1.13.4.1.	The UK has, over a period of 40 years, entwined its civil society and economy with that of its European neighbours. What it did before this period of harmonisation is not relevant to where it is now. Emerging rapidly from such carefully constructed relationships is a risk, and one that is unprecedented.	con	
only by remaining in the eu would the uk be capable of contributing to eu reform.	2_1.14.	Only by remaining in the EU would the UK be capable of contributing to EU reform.	con	The powers that be in the EU have resisted reform so far, despite attempts by those who feel it's needed. If UK left the EU, this would cause pain and, as such serve as a warning that pleas for reform cannot simply be ignored. This may give support to others suggesting reform. So while this point is correct, UK could indirectly contribute to reform by leaving.	The leaders of the EU wish to lead the EU toward closer integration and have demonstrated that they does not want reform in the way that UK voters do.	The UK is still one of the leading EU nations, judging by the size of the population, numbers of the MEPs and size of the financial contributions.	Even with the threat of the UK leaving the EU, David Cameron was unable to win a single significant concession from Brussels when he attempt to renegotiate the UK's relationship with the EU in 2016.	The UK tried to contribute to EU reform but this attempts failed, hence the decision to leave. Now there is no reason to contribute, similarly the UK would not be involved in reforming ASEAN or MERCOSUR.
the powers that be in the eu have resisted reform so far, despite attempts by those who feel it's needed. if uk left the eu, this would cause pain and, as such serve as a warning that pleas for reform cannot simply be ignored. this may give support to others suggesting reform. so while this point is correct, uk could indirectly contribute to reform by leaving.	2_1.14.1.	The powers that be in the EU have resisted reform so far, despite attempts by those who feel it's needed. If UK left the EU, this would cause pain and, as such serve as a warning that pleas for reform cannot simply be ignored. This may give support to others suggesting reform. So while this point is correct, UK could indirectly contribute to reform by leaving.	pro	
the leaders of the eu wish to lead the eu toward closer integration and have demonstrated that they does not want reform in the way that uk voters do.	2_1.14.2.	The leaders of the EU wish to lead the EU toward closer integration and have demonstrated that they does not want reform in the way that UK voters do.	pro	Emmanuel Macron, the French President, has continuously argued for closer political integration.	Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the European Commission, is calling for tighter integration of the EU member countries.	Polls conducted in the UK routinely show that that more British oppose rather than support plans for tighter EU integration, and that most of them don't want the UK to be part of a more integrated EU.	Spain's Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy also backs calls for closer integration.	Other EU member countries share the UK's concerns about closer integration, and as further integration has to happen unanimously, it is not a realistic prospect for the foreseeable future.	Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte rejected the notion that the European Union is on an inevitable path towards greater political integration.
emmanuel macron, the french president, has continuously argued for closer political integration.	2_1.14.2.1.	Emmanuel Macron, the French President, has continuously argued for closer political integration.	pro	
jean-claude juncker, the president of the european commission, is calling for tighter integration of the eu member countries.	2_1.14.2.2.	Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the European Commission, is calling for tighter integration of the EU member countries.	pro	
polls conducted in the uk routinely show that that more british oppose rather than support plans for tighter eu integration, and that most of them don't want the uk to be part of a more integrated eu.	2_1.14.2.3.	Polls conducted in the UK routinely show that that more British oppose rather than support plans for tighter EU integration, and that most of them don't want the UK to be part of a more integrated EU.	pro	
spain's prime minister mariano rajoy also backs calls for closer integration.	2_1.14.2.4.	Spain's Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy also backs calls for closer integration.	pro	
other eu member countries share the uk's concerns about closer integration, and as further integration has to happen unanimously, it is not a realistic prospect for the foreseeable future.	2_1.14.2.5.	Other EU member countries share the UK's concerns about closer integration, and as further integration has to happen unanimously, it is not a realistic prospect for the foreseeable future.	con	Many EU nations opposed to EU integration, such as Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic, have limited influence on that process due to their population and economic contribution.
many eu nations opposed to eu integration, such as hungary, poland, and the czech republic, have limited influence on that process due to their population and economic contribution.	2_1.14.2.5.1.	Many EU nations opposed to EU integration, such as Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic, have limited influence on that process due to their population and economic contribution.	pro	
dutch prime minister mark rutte rejected the notion that the european union is on an inevitable path towards greater political integration.	2_1.14.2.6.	Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte rejected the notion that the European Union is on an inevitable path towards greater political integration.	con	
the uk is still one of the leading eu nations, judging by the size of the population, numbers of the meps and size of the financial contributions.	2_1.14.3.	The UK is still one of the leading EU nations, judging by the size of the population, numbers of the MEPs and size of the financial contributions.	con	
even with the threat of the uk leaving the eu, david cameron was unable to win a single significant concession from brussels when he attempt to renegotiate the uk's relationship with the eu in 2016.	2_1.14.4.	Even with the threat of the UK leaving the EU, David Cameron was unable to win a single significant concession from Brussels when he attempt to renegotiate the UK's relationship with the EU in 2016.	pro	David Cameron did win some proposed concessions they where canceled when the UK voted to leave.	Cameron did not win sufficient concessions to change the minds of enough people to win a referendum.	If a country could just threaten the EU with leaving so that they can acquire more advantages, then the point of the EU would gradually be lost
david cameron did win some proposed concessions they where canceled when the uk voted to leave.	2_1.14.4.1.	David Cameron did win some proposed concessions they where canceled when the UK voted to leave.	con	
cameron did not win sufficient concessions to change the minds of enough people to win a referendum.	2_1.14.4.2.	Cameron did not win sufficient concessions to change the minds of enough people to win a referendum.	pro	
if a country could just threaten the eu with leaving so that they can acquire more advantages, then the point of the eu would gradually be lost	2_1.14.4.3.	If a country could just threaten the EU with leaving so that they can acquire more advantages, then the point of the EU would gradually be lost	con	
the uk tried to contribute to eu reform but this attempts failed, hence the decision to leave. now there is no reason to contribute, similarly the uk would not be involved in reforming asean or mercosur.	2_1.14.5.	The UK tried to contribute to EU reform but this attempts failed, hence the decision to leave. Now there is no reason to contribute, similarly the UK would not be involved in reforming ASEAN or MERCOSUR.	pro	
leaving would harm the eu.	2_1.15.	Leaving would harm the EU.	con	The wish of UK was a sign to the other EU countries how fragile the EU was and lead to a change in the minds. Following that, the EU countries acted stronger with a more consistent voice in the negotiations with UK. The EU today is stronger and more united than before.	Although any economic harm caused by leaving could be dealt with by the EU, exports from the EU to the UK would still suffer.	Leaving would reduce the size of the EU economy and reduce its bargaining power with other nations.	The UK, as a key member of the EU with strong economy, could severely injure economies of weaker EU countries who require the EU for help.
the wish of uk was a sign to the other eu countries how fragile the eu was and lead to a change in the minds. following that, the eu countries acted stronger with a more consistent voice in the negotiations with uk. the eu today is stronger and more united than before.	2_1.15.1.	The wish of UK was a sign to the other EU countries how fragile the EU was and lead to a change in the minds. Following that, the EU countries acted stronger with a more consistent voice in the negotiations with UK. The EU today is stronger and more united than before.	pro	
although any economic harm caused by leaving could be dealt with by the eu, exports from the eu to the uk would still suffer.	2_1.15.2.	Although any economic harm caused by leaving could be dealt with by the EU, exports from the EU to the UK would still suffer.	con	
leaving would reduce the size of the eu economy and reduce its bargaining power with other nations.	2_1.15.3.	Leaving would reduce the size of the EU economy and reduce its bargaining power with other nations.	con	
the uk, as a key member of the eu with strong economy, could severely injure economies of weaker eu countries who require the eu for help.	2_1.15.4.	The UK, as a key member of the EU with strong economy, could severely injure economies of weaker EU countries who require the EU for help.	con	Weaker EU countries might be majorly affected by Brexit, as the UK has the 6th largest economy in the world, and contributed a large amount to the EU.
weaker eu countries might be majorly affected by brexit, as the uk has the 6th largest economy in the world, and contributed a large amount to the eu.	2_1.15.4.1.	Weaker EU countries might be majorly affected by Brexit, as the UK has the 6th largest economy in the world, and contributed a large amount to the EU.	con	
leaving the european union is likely to be economically catastrophic for the uk.	2_1.16.	Leaving the European Union is likely to be economically catastrophic for the UK.	con	Other developed nations such as the US and Australia grow as fast or faster than developed countries in the EU. There is no reason why the UK cannot replicate their success as an independent nation.	Brexit will negatively affect London's talent pool.	The EU has expressed its willingness to agree both a transmission deal and a full FTA with the UK thereafter, which will mitigate the negative effects of leaving the EU.	The British economy is already suffering as a consequence of Brexit.	The devaluation of the pound would be the most terrible blow to the heart of the UK, which is an importing nation.	Almost all of the "Project Fear" predictions about the economic, social and political damages that a Brexit would inflict on the UK have not turned out to be true.	Multiple economic bodies have predicted a weaker economy for the UK, in the long term, outside of the Union.	The EU is the slowest growing market in the world today. Leaving would allow Britain to establish bilateral trade with growing markets, i.e. MERCOSUR, SE Asia, while still in their in infancy, allowing better terms to be established than with traditionally economically strong nations.	There is a very high cost involved in duplicating a lot of EU backed institutions on a national level (for example European Drug Agency, or the aviation regulators)	For the EU to allow such a catastrophe in the UK would transform it into a union based on economic duress rather than mutual co-operation.	Leaving the EU means that the UK also leaves the trade agreements made by the EU. Because of this the UK will have to sign new trade deals which will be done under less advantageous conditions as they won't have the leverage that the EU does.	Parts of the United Kingdom, such as Northern Ireland rely heavily on the agricultural subventions by the European Union.	Europe funds regions directly and invests £5 billion per year in the UK	Being in the customs union means that when UK companies want to import from and export to European countries, they pay no customs duty and there are no administrative formalities	Standards for products sold across the EU are developed in a coordinated fashion, thus freeing businesses from the need to adapt their products to different country-specific standards.	44.5% of the UK's exports in 2017 were to the EU. These trade flows would be negatively impacted as trade costs increase even under the most optimistic assumptions.	Government impact analysis shows that GDP will be reduced by between 2 and 9%.	The British Economy will no longer be tethered to the tremendous debts other Euro countries are accumulating.
other developed nations such as the us and australia grow as fast or faster than developed countries in the eu. there is no reason why the uk cannot replicate their success as an independent nation.	2_1.16.1.	Other developed nations such as the US and Australia grow as fast or faster than developed countries in the EU. There is no reason why the UK cannot replicate their success as an independent nation.	pro	
brexit will negatively affect london's talent pool.	2_1.16.2.	Brexit will negatively affect London's talent pool.	con	
the eu has expressed its willingness to agree both a transmission deal and a full fta with the uk thereafter, which will mitigate the negative effects of leaving the eu.	2_1.16.3.	The EU has expressed its willingness to agree both a transmission deal and a full FTA with the UK thereafter, which will mitigate the negative effects of leaving the EU.	pro	Mitigate effects, maybe. Match the benefits, never. The other 27 EU countries are never going to agree on a deal that's more beneficial to the UK than staying in the EU.
mitigate effects, maybe. match the benefits, never. the other 27 eu countries are never going to agree on a deal that's more beneficial to the uk than staying in the eu.	2_1.16.3.1.	Mitigate effects, maybe. Match the benefits, never. The other 27 EU countries are never going to agree on a deal that's more beneficial to the UK than staying in the EU.	con	
the british economy is already suffering as a consequence of brexit.	2_1.16.4.	The British economy is already suffering as a consequence of Brexit.	con	The British government is revising the country's economic growth given evidence of downturn.	Reports say that leaving is already costing £500 million a week.	The prospect of Brexit has already starting to drive companies and banks out of the UK, and with them job and opportunities.
the british government is revising the country's economic growth given evidence of downturn.	2_1.16.4.1.	The British government is revising the country's economic growth given evidence of downturn.	con	
reports say that leaving is already costing £500 million a week.	2_1.16.4.2.	Reports say that leaving is already costing £500 million a week.	con	
the prospect of brexit has already starting to drive companies and banks out of the uk, and with them job and opportunities.	2_1.16.4.3.	The prospect of Brexit has already starting to drive companies and banks out of the UK, and with them job and opportunities.	con	
the devaluation of the pound would be the most terrible blow to the heart of the uk, which is an importing nation.	2_1.16.5.	The devaluation of the pound would be the most terrible blow to the heart of the UK, which is an importing nation.	con	It would help UK exports be more competitive.
it would help uk exports be more competitive.	2_1.16.5.1.	It would help UK exports be more competitive.	pro	
almost all of the "project fear" predictions about the economic, social and political damages that a brexit would inflict on the uk have not turned out to be true.	2_1.16.6.	Almost all of the "Project Fear" predictions about the economic, social and political damages that a Brexit would inflict on the UK have not turned out to be true.	pro	The British economy is already suffering as a consequence of Brexit.	The UK has not yet left the EU, so it's too soon to judge.	The prospect of Brexit has already starting to drive companies and banks out of the UK, and with them job and opportunities.	The "Project Fear" predictions haven't come true yet because measures were taken to mitigate them.
the uk has not yet left the eu, so it's too soon to judge.	2_1.16.6.2.	The UK has not yet left the EU, so it's too soon to judge.	con	
the "project fear" predictions haven't come true yet because measures were taken to mitigate them.	2_1.16.6.4.	The "Project Fear" predictions haven't come true yet because measures were taken to mitigate them.	con	
multiple economic bodies have predicted a weaker economy for the uk, in the long term, outside of the union.	2_1.16.7.	Multiple economic bodies have predicted a weaker economy for the UK, in the long term, outside of the Union.	con	The OECD predicts weak economic growth for the UK due to Brexit.	The EIU warns the damage from a decision to leave the EU will be felt until at least 2020.	A leaked UK government forecast reportedly predicts that the British economy will suffer no matter what trade deal is struck with the European Union.
the oecd predicts weak economic growth for the uk due to brexit.	2_1.16.7.1.	The OECD predicts weak economic growth for the UK due to Brexit.	con	
the eiu warns the damage from a decision to leave the eu will be felt until at least 2020.	2_1.16.7.2.	The EIU warns the damage from a decision to leave the EU will be felt until at least 2020.	con	
a leaked uk government forecast reportedly predicts that the british economy will suffer no matter what trade deal is struck with the european union.	2_1.16.7.3.	A leaked UK government forecast reportedly predicts that the British economy will suffer no matter what trade deal is struck with the European Union.	con	
the eu is the slowest growing market in the world today. leaving would allow britain to establish bilateral trade with growing markets, i.e. mercosur, se asia, while still in their in infancy, allowing better terms to be established than with traditionally economically strong nations.	2_1.16.8.	The EU is the slowest growing market in the world today. Leaving would allow Britain to establish bilateral trade with growing markets, i.e. MERCOSUR, SE Asia, while still in their in infancy, allowing better terms to be established than with traditionally economically strong nations.	pro	Rate of growth of an economic association is not a proxy for its value to a member state. Smaller size organisations typically exhibit higher growth rates but their total increase in value may still be significantly less than that of a much larger organisation with a slower growth rate. 5% of a very big number is a bigger quantity than 50% of a very small number.	The EU has already initiated trade negotiations with countries of SE Asia such as Vietnam, New Zealand, Australia and Singapore. Being a market of nearly 500 million consumers, the EU has great negotiating power, especially in trade matters. Therefore, the EU can achieve better trade terms with third countries than the UK alone.
rate of growth of an economic association is not a proxy for its value to a member state. smaller size organisations typically exhibit higher growth rates but their total increase in value may still be significantly less than that of a much larger organisation with a slower growth rate. 5% of a very big number is a bigger quantity than 50% of a very small number.	2_1.16.8.1.	Rate of growth of an economic association is not a proxy for its value to a member state. Smaller size organisations typically exhibit higher growth rates but their total increase in value may still be significantly less than that of a much larger organisation with a slower growth rate. 5% of a very big number is a bigger quantity than 50% of a very small number.	con	
the eu has already initiated trade negotiations with countries of se asia such as vietnam, new zealand, australia and singapore. being a market of nearly 500 million consumers, the eu has great negotiating power, especially in trade matters. therefore, the eu can achieve better trade terms with third countries than the uk alone.	2_1.16.8.2.	The EU has already initiated trade negotiations with countries of SE Asia such as Vietnam, New Zealand, Australia and Singapore. Being a market of nearly 500 million consumers, the EU has great negotiating power, especially in trade matters. Therefore, the EU can achieve better trade terms with third countries than the UK alone.	con	
there is a very high cost involved in duplicating a lot of eu backed institutions on a national level (for example european drug agency, or the aviation regulators)	2_1.16.9.	There is a very high cost involved in duplicating a lot of EU backed institutions on a national level (for example European Drug Agency, or the aviation regulators)	con	
for the eu to allow such a catastrophe in the uk would transform it into a union based on economic duress rather than mutual co-operation.	2_1.16.10.	For the EU to allow such a catastrophe in the UK would transform it into a union based on economic duress rather than mutual co-operation.	pro	This is irrelevant; there is no argument here that tells us Brexit would be better for the UK.	One cannot expect the benefits of being a club member without actually being one.	If the UK chooses to leave the EU then there is no treaty or any other obligation on the EU to provide economic protection for a departing member state.	Article 50 exists to indicate that nations joining the EU are not trapped in it. If Brexit proved that nations were in effect trapped in the EU by the threat of economic consequences, this could be seen as federalism or imperialism by other nations with levels of Euroscepticism or a desire for EU reform.
this is irrelevant; there is no argument here that tells us brexit would be better for the uk.	2_1.16.10.1.	This is irrelevant; there is no argument here that tells us Brexit would be better for the UK.	con	
one cannot expect the benefits of being a club member without actually being one.	2_1.16.10.2.	One cannot expect the benefits of being a club member without actually being one.	con	
if the uk chooses to leave the eu then there is no treaty or any other obligation on the eu to provide economic protection for a departing member state.	2_1.16.10.3.	If the UK chooses to leave the EU then there is no treaty or any other obligation on the EU to provide economic protection for a departing member state.	con	
article 50 exists to indicate that nations joining the eu are not trapped in it. if brexit proved that nations were in effect trapped in the eu by the threat of economic consequences, this could be seen as federalism or imperialism by other nations with levels of euroscepticism or a desire for eu reform.	2_1.16.10.4.	Article 50 exists to indicate that nations joining the EU are not trapped in it. If Brexit proved that nations were in effect trapped in the EU by the threat of economic consequences, this could be seen as federalism or imperialism by other nations with levels of Euroscepticism or a desire for EU reform.	pro	One cannot expect the same benefits of the EU while being outside of the EU. If a country can fall apart so easily (economically) then this is the fault of the country at hand.
one cannot expect the same benefits of the eu while being outside of the eu. if a country can fall apart so easily (economically) then this is the fault of the country at hand.	2_1.16.10.4.1.	One cannot expect the same benefits of the EU while being outside of the EU. If a country can fall apart so easily (economically) then this is the fault of the country at hand.	con	No country in the EU can require its businesses to be resilient to leaving the EU. If it was even legally possible to do so, those businesses would move elsewhere via the same freedoms the EU allows. Nobody told the EU that making sure an economic union remained voluntary was easy.
no country in the eu can require its businesses to be resilient to leaving the eu. if it was even legally possible to do so, those businesses would move elsewhere via the same freedoms the eu allows. nobody told the eu that making sure an economic union remained voluntary was easy.	2_1.16.10.4.1.1.	No country in the EU can require its businesses to be resilient to leaving the EU. If it was even legally possible to do so, those businesses would move elsewhere via the same freedoms the EU allows. Nobody told the EU that making sure an economic union remained voluntary was easy.	pro	
leaving the eu means that the uk also leaves the trade agreements made by the eu. because of this the uk will have to sign new trade deals which will be done under less advantageous conditions as they won't have the leverage that the eu does.	2_1.16.11.	Leaving the EU means that the UK also leaves the trade agreements made by the EU. Because of this the UK will have to sign new trade deals which will be done under less advantageous conditions as they won't have the leverage that the EU does.	con	
parts of the united kingdom, such as northern ireland rely heavily on the agricultural subventions by the european union.	2_1.16.12.	Parts of the United Kingdom, such as Northern Ireland rely heavily on the agricultural subventions by the European Union.	con	
europe funds regions directly and invests £5 billion per year in the uk	2_1.16.13.	Europe funds regions directly and invests £5 billion per year in the UK	con	
being in the customs union means that when uk companies want to import from and export to european countries, they pay no customs duty and there are no administrative formalities	2_1.16.14.	Being in the customs union means that when UK companies want to import from and export to European countries, they pay no customs duty and there are no administrative formalities	con	
standards for products sold across the eu are developed in a coordinated fashion, thus freeing businesses from the need to adapt their products to different country-specific standards.	2_1.16.15.	Standards for products sold across the EU are developed in a coordinated fashion, thus freeing businesses from the need to adapt their products to different country-specific standards.	con	
44.5% of the uk's exports in 2017 were to the eu. these trade flows would be negatively impacted as trade costs increase even under the most optimistic assumptions.	2_1.16.16.	44.5% of the UK's exports in 2017 were to the EU. These trade flows would be negatively impacted as trade costs increase even under the most optimistic assumptions.	con	
government impact analysis shows that gdp will be reduced by between 2 and 9%.	2_1.16.17.	Government impact analysis shows that GDP will be reduced by between 2 and 9%.	con	
the british economy will no longer be tethered to the tremendous debts other euro countries are accumulating.	2_1.16.18.	The British Economy will no longer be tethered to the tremendous debts other Euro countries are accumulating.	pro	
the european union is a force for ensuring that the uk and other countries apply internationally agreed legislation.	2_1.17.	The European Union is a force for ensuring that the UK and other countries apply internationally agreed legislation.	con	The European Union is committed to climate change action and urges member states to meet ecological targets.	There are various other organizations that fulfill the same function, such as the UN, NATO or the WTO. The wast majority of the EU's members are also members of these organizations. Multiplying the same functions leads to more bureaucracy, weakens responsibilities and costs more.
the european union is committed to climate change action and urges member states to meet ecological targets.	2_1.17.1.	The European Union is committed to climate change action and urges member states to meet ecological targets.	con	
there are various other organizations that fulfill the same function, such as the un, nato or the wto. the wast majority of the eu's members are also members of these organizations. multiplying the same functions leads to more bureaucracy, weakens responsibilities and costs more.	2_1.17.2.	There are various other organizations that fulfill the same function, such as the UN, NATO or the WTO. The wast majority of the EU's members are also members of these organizations. Multiplying the same functions leads to more bureaucracy, weakens responsibilities and costs more.	pro	
the uk and the eu share a history and a common culture.	2_1.18.	The UK and the EU share a history and a common culture.	con	The UK has no particular historical connection with many EU nations, such as Slovenia or Lithuania.	Many European states share the same folklore with the UK and folklore is "the expressive body of culture".	There is general agreement on the existence of core elements that form the cultural foundation of modern Europe, which includes the UK.	The UK also has highly important relationships with countries outside the EU - notably the United States and the Commonwealth.	British alliances and wars with France, Spain and Germany stretch back hundreds of years.	Portugal was one of Britain's first allies.	Cyprus and Malta were British overseas territories.	The UK can remain close and cooperative with its allies, but that is not an argument for a political union.	A common history is not cause for creating a common future. Just because something has always been does not mean it is the best way.	The EU has no common culture (compare the cultures of Romania, Greece and Sweden), therefore there is nothing to share.	The history of the UK outside the EU is richer and much longer than its EU membership or even the EU's existence.
the uk has no particular historical connection with many eu nations, such as slovenia or lithuania.	2_1.18.1.	The UK has no particular historical connection with many EU nations, such as Slovenia or Lithuania.	pro	Slovenia and Lithuania are poor examples given that they simply have not existed (at least in their modern forms) for a significant duration of time. The UK has many cultural ties to states they were formerly a part of.
slovenia and lithuania are poor examples given that they simply have not existed (at least in their modern forms) for a significant duration of time. the uk has many cultural ties to states they were formerly a part of.	2_1.18.1.1.	Slovenia and Lithuania are poor examples given that they simply have not existed (at least in their modern forms) for a significant duration of time. The UK has many cultural ties to states they were formerly a part of.	con	
many european states share the same folklore with the uk and folklore is "the expressive body of culture".	2_1.18.2.	Many European states share the same folklore with the UK and folklore is "the expressive body of culture".	con	
there is general agreement on the existence of core elements that form the cultural foundation of modern europe, which includes the uk.	2_1.18.3.	There is general agreement on the existence of core elements that form the cultural foundation of modern Europe, which includes the UK.	con	
the uk also has highly important relationships with countries outside the eu - notably the united states and the commonwealth.	2_1.18.4.	The UK also has highly important relationships with countries outside the EU - notably the United States and the Commonwealth.	pro	Other EU members have equally important relationships with countries outside the EU, for example France and the Netherlands with their respective former colonies and overseas territories, and they do not perceive the EU as an obstacle in maintaining these international relationships.	Being a member of the EU strengthened the UK's relationships and negotiating positions with external countries.
other eu members have equally important relationships with countries outside the eu, for example france and the netherlands with their respective former colonies and overseas territories, and they do not perceive the eu as an obstacle in maintaining these international relationships.	2_1.18.4.1.	Other EU members have equally important relationships with countries outside the EU, for example France and the Netherlands with their respective former colonies and overseas territories, and they do not perceive the EU as an obstacle in maintaining these international relationships.	con	
being a member of the eu strengthened the uk's relationships and negotiating positions with external countries.	2_1.18.4.2.	Being a member of the EU strengthened the UK's relationships and negotiating positions with external countries.	pro	
british alliances and wars with france, spain and germany stretch back hundreds of years.	2_1.18.5.	British alliances and wars with France, Spain and Germany stretch back hundreds of years.	con	The UK been at war with all of these countries several times stretching back hundreds of years.	Just because there have historically been connections does not mean that relations have to remain institutionalized in the EU. Decisions for the future should be based upon what is best for the future and not be made based on unwillingness to let go of the familiar.
the uk been at war with all of these countries several times stretching back hundreds of years.	2_1.18.5.1.	The UK been at war with all of these countries several times stretching back hundreds of years.	pro	
just because there have historically been connections does not mean that relations have to remain institutionalized in the eu. decisions for the future should be based upon what is best for the future and not be made based on unwillingness to let go of the familiar.	2_1.18.5.2.	Just because there have historically been connections does not mean that relations have to remain institutionalized in the EU. Decisions for the future should be based upon what is best for the future and not be made based on unwillingness to let go of the familiar.	pro	
portugal was one of britain's first allies.	2_1.18.6.	Portugal was one of Britain's first allies.	con	
cyprus and malta were british overseas territories.	2_1.18.7.	Cyprus and Malta were British overseas territories.	con	The ROI gained their independence a 100 of years ago as well. So what that they were British colonies if they are sovereign states today.
the roi gained their independence a 100 of years ago as well. so what that they were british colonies if they are sovereign states today.	2_1.18.7.1.	The ROI gained their independence a 100 of years ago as well. So what that they were British colonies if they are sovereign states today.	pro	
the uk can remain close and cooperative with its allies, but that is not an argument for a political union.	2_1.18.8.	The UK can remain close and cooperative with its allies, but that is not an argument for a political union.	pro	
a common history is not cause for creating a common future. just because something has always been does not mean it is the best way.	2_1.18.9.	A common history is not cause for creating a common future. Just because something has always been does not mean it is the best way.	pro	
the eu has no common culture (compare the cultures of romania, greece and sweden), therefore there is nothing to share.	2_1.18.10.	The EU has no common culture (compare the cultures of Romania, Greece and Sweden), therefore there is nothing to share.	pro	The territory and population of the European Union largely match those of the Roman and Germanic empires that have shaped the rich and complex history of Europe, including Britain’s, over the past two millennia.	All EU member countries share mostly Christian populations (Roman Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox). The UK ranks right in the middle of all EU countries in terms of religiousness, but has of all 28 member states the third largest fraction of Muslims.	Many European states share the same folklore with the UK and folklore is "the expressive body of culture".
the territory and population of the european union largely match those of the roman and germanic empires that have shaped the rich and complex history of europe, including britain’s, over the past two millennia.	2_1.18.10.1.	The territory and population of the European Union largely match those of the Roman and Germanic empires that have shaped the rich and complex history of Europe, including Britain’s, over the past two millennia.	con	The legacy of the roman empire is one shared across many contemporary European states.
the legacy of the roman empire is one shared across many contemporary european states.	2_1.18.10.1.1.	The legacy of the roman empire is one shared across many contemporary European states.	con	
all eu member countries share mostly christian populations (roman catholic, protestant, orthodox). the uk ranks right in the middle of all eu countries in terms of religiousness, but has of all 28 member states the third largest fraction of muslims.	2_1.18.10.2.	All EU member countries share mostly Christian populations (Roman Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox). The UK ranks right in the middle of all EU countries in terms of religiousness, but has of all 28 member states the third largest fraction of Muslims.	con	
the history of the uk outside the eu is richer and much longer than its eu membership or even the eu's existence.	2_1.18.11.	The history of the UK outside the EU is richer and much longer than its EU membership or even the EU's existence.	pro	The UK has been part of political unions with other members of the European Union long before joining the European Economic Community in 1973. For example, the house Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was the family of the sovereigns of the United Kingdom, Belgium, Portugal, and Bulgaria.	Most EU members states are much older and have a much richer history than the EU (in the case of Greece, the world's oldest democracy, covering 2.5 millennia), and yet would not consider this to be a reason for leaving.	The history of this island and a bit of the one next to it is much longer and richer than the concept of the "UK" or even that of nation states. This country was hiberni, pictish and Briton before it was saxon, Norman or roman, was part of mainland Europe before it broke off, was pagan before it was Christian. The concept of "UK" is itself a construct and predated by other forms, just as much as the EU. Its all part of the same history and time is perceived to move forwards, not backwards.	The history of the UK outside of the EU is more violent and less prosperous than within.
the uk has been part of political unions with other members of the european union long before joining the european economic community in 1973. for example, the house saxe-coburg-gotha was the family of the sovereigns of the united kingdom, belgium, portugal, and bulgaria.	2_1.18.11.1.	The UK has been part of political unions with other members of the European Union long before joining the European Economic Community in 1973. For example, the house Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was the family of the sovereigns of the United Kingdom, Belgium, Portugal, and Bulgaria.	con	
most eu members states are much older and have a much richer history than the eu (in the case of greece, the world's oldest democracy, covering 2.5 millennia), and yet would not consider this to be a reason for leaving.	2_1.18.11.2.	Most EU members states are much older and have a much richer history than the EU (in the case of Greece, the world's oldest democracy, covering 2.5 millennia), and yet would not consider this to be a reason for leaving.	con	
the history of this island and a bit of the one next to it is much longer and richer than the concept of the "uk" or even that of nation states. this country was hiberni, pictish and briton before it was saxon, norman or roman, was part of mainland europe before it broke off, was pagan before it was christian. the concept of "uk" is itself a construct and predated by other forms, just as much as the eu. its all part of the same history and time is perceived to move forwards, not backwards.	2_1.18.11.3.	The history of this island and a bit of the one next to it is much longer and richer than the concept of the "UK" or even that of nation states. This country was hiberni, pictish and Briton before it was saxon, Norman or roman, was part of mainland Europe before it broke off, was pagan before it was Christian. The concept of "UK" is itself a construct and predated by other forms, just as much as the EU. Its all part of the same history and time is perceived to move forwards, not backwards.	con	
the history of the uk outside of the eu is more violent and less prosperous than within.	2_1.18.11.4.	The history of the UK outside of the EU is more violent and less prosperous than within.	con	
