the different phases of clinical trials are strictly observed for the development of any vaccine. they make it possible to ensure the effectiveness of the vaccines being evaluated while guaranteeing the safety of the thousands of volunteers, who are closely monitored to measure and control any adverse effects.	1.1_1	The different phases of clinical trials are strictly observed for the development of any vaccine. They make it possible to ensure the effectiveness of the vaccines being evaluated while guaranteeing the safety of the thousands of volunteers, who are closely monitored to measure and control any adverse effects.	pro
like any medicine, vaccines sometimes have side effects. but these side effects are almost always harmless, and much less severe than the common symptoms of the disease or its severe forms.	1.1_2	Like any medicine, vaccines sometimes have side effects. But these side effects are almost always harmless, and much less severe than the common symptoms of the disease or its severe forms.	pro
in the case of covid-19, the disease can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome, cardiovascular or neurological complications such as encephalopathy, inflammatory brain disease, and other negative long-term effects. the cost-benefit balance therefore tilts heavily in favor of vaccination.	1.1_3	In the case of Covid-19, the disease can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome, cardiovascular or neurological complications such as encephalopathy, inflammatory brain disease, and other negative long-term effects. The cost-benefit balance therefore tilts heavily in favor of vaccination.	pro
to receive authorization from health authorities, covid-19 vaccines, like all other vaccines, had to comply with four essential steps to test the efficacy and safety of the vaccine.	1.1_4	To receive authorization from health authorities, Covid-19 vaccines, like all other vaccines, had to comply with four essential steps to test the efficacy and safety of the vaccine.	pro
after having sequenced the genome of the virus responsible for covid-19 (sars-cov-2), scientists developed vaccines to test in cell and animal models. with this, they can establish that the vaccines are not toxic and that they trigger an immune response.	1.1_5	After having sequenced the genome of the virus responsible for Covid-19 (SARS-CoV-2), scientists developed vaccines to test in cell and animal models. With this, they can establish that the vaccines are not toxic and that they trigger an immune response.	pro
since there are many cases of covid-19 in the population, the likelihood that some volunteers will be infected is high enough that the effects of the vaccine are easily detected.	1.1_6	Since there are many cases of Covid-19 in the population, the likelihood that some volunteers will be infected is high enough that the effects of the vaccine are easily detected.	pro
the large number of volunteers also helps to ensure that the vaccine does not, even rarely, cause serious side effects. serious side effects, or very frequent side effects, would trigger the immediate discontinuation of the study and the non-release of the vaccine.	1.1_7	The large number of volunteers also helps to ensure that the vaccine does not, even rarely, cause serious side effects. Serious side effects, or very frequent side effects, would trigger the immediate discontinuation of the study and the non-release of the vaccine.	pro
vaccines that are placed on the market are not dangerous. there is a scientific consensus on this issue: the vast majority of scientists agree that vaccines are safe and effective, and nearly 400,000 scientific studies have been published on vaccines.	1.2_1	Vaccines that are placed on the market are not dangerous. There is a scientific consensus on this issue: the vast majority of scientists agree that vaccines are safe and effective, and nearly 400,000 scientific studies have been published on vaccines.	pro
most vaccine reactions are minor and temporary, and possible side effects from vaccines are closely watched. the effects of vaccines are very well known since each year, several million people are vaccinated nationally (and hundreds of millions in the world).	1.2_2	Most vaccine reactions are minor and temporary, and possible side effects from vaccines are closely watched. The effects of vaccines are very well known since each year, several million people are vaccinated nationally (and hundreds of millions in the world).	pro
the risk of developing a serious illness by not being vaccinated is much greater than the risk of having a side effect from the vaccination. the scientific consensus is therefore that the benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks of possible side effects.	1.2_3	The risk of developing a serious illness by not being vaccinated is much greater than the risk of having a side effect from the vaccination. The scientific consensus is therefore that the benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks of possible side effects.	pro
thanks to vaccination, the catastrophic consequences of many diseases have all but disappeared. we almost forget the risks of these diseases! yet without the vaccine, these diseases would come back and do the same damage as in the past.	1.2_4	Thanks to vaccination, the catastrophic consequences of many diseases have all but disappeared. We almost forget the risks of these diseases! Yet without the vaccine, these diseases would come back and do the same damage as in the past.	pro
to stimulate the immune response of some vaccines, substances called adjuvants are sometimes added to the vaccines. adjuvants are sometimes essential to ensure the effectiveness of vaccines. the amount of adjuvants present in vaccines is so small that in the vast majority of cases, they have no harmful effects.	1.2_5	To stimulate the immune response of some vaccines, substances called adjuvants are sometimes added to the vaccines. Adjuvants are sometimes essential to ensure the effectiveness of vaccines. The amount of adjuvants present in vaccines is so small that in the vast majority of cases, they have no harmful effects.	pro
some covid-19 vaccines will contain adjuvants. adjuvants increase the immune response, and therefore reduce the amount of antigen that must be used in each dose of vaccine. the adjuvants therefore help to ensure that a large quantity of doses can be produced quickly. in the context of a pandemic, they play a very important role in quickly protecting a greater number of people.	1.2_6	Some Covid-19 vaccines will contain adjuvants. Adjuvants increase the immune response, and therefore reduce the amount of antigen that must be used in each dose of vaccine. The adjuvants therefore help to ensure that a large quantity of doses can be produced quickly. In the context of a pandemic, they play a very important role in quickly protecting a greater number of people.	pro
vaccines that contain adjuvants go through rigorous protocols to test their safety and efficacy.	1.2_7	Vaccines that contain adjuvants go through rigorous protocols to test their safety and efficacy.	pro
aluminum salts are the most widely used adjuvants to date. with a 90-year history of use and hundreds of millions of doses injected, researchers have been able to show that the very small amount of aluminum salts contained in vaccines has no measurable effect on health.	1.2_8	Aluminum salts are the most widely used adjuvants to date. With a 90-year history of use and hundreds of millions of doses injected, researchers have been able to show that the very small amount of aluminum salts contained in vaccines has no measurable effect on health.	pro
we are exposed to aluminum salts outside of vaccination, which provides further information on their effects. for example, adults ingest about 7 to 9 milligrams of aluminum per day in their diet (vegetables, grains, shellfish, chocolate). this daily dose is 100 times greater than the amount contained in a single dose of vaccines on the market. aluminum that enters our bloodstream is quickly processed and eliminated with the urine by the kidneys.	1.2_9	We are exposed to aluminum salts outside of vaccination, which provides further information on their effects. For example, adults ingest about 7 to 9 milligrams of aluminum per day in their diet (vegetables, grains, shellfish, chocolate). This daily dose is 100 times greater than the amount contained in a single dose of vaccines on the market. Aluminum that enters our bloodstream is quickly processed and eliminated with the urine by the kidneys.	pro
like any effective medicine, vaccines can cause side effects in some people, which in most cases are mild and temporary, such as fatigue or fever. these symptoms are linked to the immune reaction that prepares our body for the next attack of the virus.	1.3_1	Like any effective medicine, vaccines can cause side effects in some people, which in most cases are mild and temporary, such as fatigue or fever. These symptoms are linked to the immune reaction that prepares our body for the next attack of the virus.	pro
in the case of covid-19 vaccines, the results of clinical trials have not shown side effects more serious than fever, headache, or muscle pain. these side effects last a few days at most.	1.3_2	In the case of Covid-19 vaccines, the results of clinical trials have not shown side effects more serious than fever, headache, or muscle pain. These side effects last a few days at most.	pro
when the uk's covid-19 vaccine was launched, three people had an allergic reaction to a component of the vaccine. health authorities have recommended that people who have had severe allergic reactions in the past and people allergic to any component of the vaccine not to be vaccinated at this stage. vaccines can, like any medicine, cause an allergic reaction. doctors are equipped to take care of patients very quickly in this scenario.	1.3_3	When the UK's Covid-19 vaccine was launched, three people had an allergic reaction to a component of the vaccine. Health authorities have recommended that people who have had severe allergic reactions in the past and people allergic to any component of the vaccine not to be vaccinated at this stage. Vaccines can, like any medicine, cause an allergic reaction. Doctors are equipped to take care of patients very quickly in this scenario.	pro
in rare cases, vaccines can cause serious side effects, but these almost always occur during the first month after the vaccine is given.	1.3_4	In rare cases, vaccines can cause serious side effects, but these almost always occur during the first month after the vaccine is given.	pro
thanks to the large number of volunteers, a serious side effect that would affect more than one in 1,000 people would have already been detected and would have led to the trial being discontinued.	1.3_5	Thanks to the large number of volunteers, a serious side effect that would affect more than one in 1,000 people would have already been detected and would have led to the trial being discontinued.	pro
the astrazeneca vaccine has been restricted to over 30s in the uk as a precaution, due to an extremely small number of rare blood clots in some people.	1.3_6	The AstraZeneca vaccine has been restricted to over 30s in the UK as a precaution, due to an extremely small number of rare blood clots in some people.	pro
out of 18 million people in the uk who have had the vaccine, 30 developed rare blood clots and 7 died. the number of people to die from this rare blood clot in normal times ranges from 2 and 16 per million, so it is unclear if the vaccine is the cause at the moment.	1.3_7	Out of 18 million people in the UK who have had the vaccine, 30 developed rare blood clots and 7 died. The number of people to die from this rare blood clot in normal times ranges from 2 and 16 per million, so it is unclear if the vaccine is the cause at the moment.	pro
it is common for medicines to have very rare side effects. even paracetamol and ibuprofen are associated with rare conditions in a very small number of people. the risk of a blood clot from the astrazeneca vaccine is similar to your risk of a blood clot after taking a long-haul flight, or to those taking the contraceptive pill.	1.3_8	It is common for medicines to have very rare side effects. Even paracetamol and ibuprofen are associated with rare conditions in a very small number of people. The risk of a blood clot from the AstraZeneca vaccine is similar to your risk of a blood clot after taking a long-haul flight, or to those taking the contraceptive pill.	pro
the rarer side effects (e.g. one in a million) are virtually impossible to detect in vaccine trials, as this would require testing tens of millions of people. however, there is a way to detect extremely rare side effects. in phase 4 trials, the safety of vaccines in the population is assessed once they have been released.	1.3_9	The rarer side effects (e.g. one in a million) are virtually impossible to detect in vaccine trials, as this would require testing tens of millions of people. However, there is a way to detect extremely rare side effects. In Phase 4 trials, the safety of vaccines in the population is assessed once they have been released.	pro
the health authorities monitor the occurrence of any side effects in the long term, after the authorization of any vaccine or medicine. when symptoms appear, they are reported to the mhra (medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency). then, the scientific experts carry out in-depth research and assess the safety based on the new data. this process is in place for all medicines that are currently on the market.	1.3_10	The health authorities monitor the occurrence of any side effects in the long term, after the authorization of any vaccine or medicine. When symptoms appear, they are reported to the MHRA (Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency). Then, the scientific experts carry out in-depth research and assess the safety based on the new data. This process is in place for all medicines that are currently on the market.	pro
a messenger rna is like a microscopic manual. thanks to the vaccine, these instructions for use are sent to the cells of the body so that they produce one of the proteins of the coronavirus. on its own, this protein is completely harmless. when the immune system spots this protein in the body, it makes antibodies against the coronavirus, which allows us to defend ourselves against the virus later.	1.4_1	A messenger RNA is like a microscopic manual. Thanks to the vaccine, these instructions for use are sent to the cells of the body so that they produce one of the proteins of the coronavirus. On its own, this protein is completely harmless. When the immune system spots this protein in the body, it makes antibodies against the coronavirus, which allows us to defend ourselves against the virus later.	pro
in the case of messenger rna vaccines, the rna does not enter the nuclei of cells, where our dna is located. there is therefore no risk that their genetic code will be incorporated into our dna, or that they may modify our dna.	1.4_2	In the case of messenger RNA vaccines, the RNA does not enter the nuclei of cells, where our DNA is located. There is therefore no risk that their genetic code will be incorporated into our DNA, or that they may modify our DNA.	pro
it is normal to be worried about rapid technological advances, including in the field of medicine. however, the messenger rna vaccine technology has been in development for over 30 years. other rna vaccines are in the clinical trial phase, and aim to fight cancer, flu and rabies. the production of the different components of an rna vaccine is a fast and well-controlled process.	1.4_3	It is normal to be worried about rapid technological advances, including in the field of medicine. However, the messenger RNA vaccine technology has been in development for over 30 years. Other RNA vaccines are in the clinical trial phase, and aim to fight cancer, flu and rabies. The production of the different components of an RNA vaccine is a fast and well-controlled process.	pro
like any vaccine, rna vaccines can cause an allergic reaction in some people. these rare reactions are monitored and patients are treated immediately.	1.4_4	Like any vaccine, RNA vaccines can cause an allergic reaction in some people. These rare reactions are monitored and patients are treated immediately.	pro
the main (theoretical) risk of rna vaccines is that of triggering a strong immune response. therefore, people prone to autoimmune diseases are potentially at risk for these vaccines.	1.4_5	The main (theoretical) risk of RNA vaccines is that of triggering a strong immune response. Therefore, people prone to autoimmune diseases are potentially at risk for these vaccines.	con
the mrna of vaccines is surrounded by a layer of nanoparticles of lipids (fat) which serve to protect it and then degrade naturally. these lipid molecules are completely natural: our cells themselves are surrounded by lipids.	1.4_6	The mRNA of vaccines is surrounded by a layer of nanoparticles of lipids (fat) which serve to protect it and then degrade naturally. These lipid molecules are completely natural: our cells themselves are surrounded by lipids.	pro
when we encounter a microbe (bacteria, virus), our immune system defends itself by producing antibodies, intended to neutralize and eliminate the microbe. vaccination causes the production of these same antibodies, but avoids the dangers associated with the disease.	2.1_1	When we encounter a microbe (bacteria, virus), our immune system defends itself by producing antibodies, intended to neutralize and eliminate the microbe. Vaccination causes the production of these same antibodies, but avoids the dangers associated with the disease.	pro
the aim of the vaccine is to make our immune system believe that it is infected with the covid-19 virus, by presenting the virus' “identity card”, also called an antigen, to provoke an immune response. there are many methods of presenting this virus “identity card”: for example, injecting proteins belonging to the virus, or using messenger rna as an intermediary.	2.1_2	The aim of the vaccine is to make our immune system believe that it is infected with the Covid-19 virus, by presenting the virus' “identity card”, also called an antigen, to provoke an immune response. There are many methods of presenting this virus “identity card”: for example, injecting proteins belonging to the virus, or using messenger RNA as an intermediary.	pro
when you trigger an immune response with a vaccine, you allow the immune system to become familiar with the virus. so the next time it encounters the real virus (and not just its “id card”), our immune system will quickly recognize it and kill it before we develop any symptoms, especially severe symptoms.	2.1_3	When you trigger an immune response with a vaccine, you allow the immune system to become familiar with the virus. So the next time it encounters the real virus (and not just its “ID card”), our immune system will quickly recognize it and kill it before we develop any symptoms, especially severe symptoms.	pro
when a sufficient proportion of the population is vaccinated (for covid-19, this proportion could be 70 to 90%, depending on the effectiveness of the vaccine in blocking the transmission of the virus), the vaccines effectively protect the population.	2.1_4	When a sufficient proportion of the population is vaccinated (for Covid-19, this proportion could be 70 to 90%, depending on the effectiveness of the vaccine in blocking the transmission of the virus), the vaccines effectively protect the population.	pro
the spread of a contagious disease is directly related to the proportion of people who can catch the disease: the more the number of people vaccinated increases, the more the spread is slowed down.	2.1_5	The spread of a contagious disease is directly related to the proportion of people who can catch the disease: the more the number of people vaccinated increases, the more the spread is slowed down.	pro
when the number of people vaccinated becomes very large, immunized people form a barrier between contagious individuals and unvaccinated individuals. the microbe then stops circulating from person to person, and the disease can be eradicated. such group protection therefore protects the vaccinated subjects, but also the unvaccinated.	2.1_6	When the number of people vaccinated becomes very large, immunized people form a barrier between contagious individuals and unvaccinated individuals. The microbe then stops circulating from person to person, and the disease can be eradicated. Such group protection therefore protects the vaccinated subjects, but also the unvaccinated.	pro
for such group protection to be achieved, the vaccines must make the vaccinated person non-contagious. in the current state of knowledge, anti-covid-19 vaccines appear to induce strong individual immunity, but we still lack data on how well they block transmission. current research will help answer this question.	2.1_7	For such group protection to be achieved, the vaccines must make the vaccinated person non-contagious. In the current state of knowledge, anti-Covid-19 vaccines appear to induce strong individual immunity, but we still lack data on how well they block transmission. Current research will help answer this question.	pro
the virus that causes covid-19 has emerged very recently, but scientists are already very familiar with it. hundreds of research teams around the world have been working on this disease intensively since the start of the epidemic. more than 150,000 scientific articles have been published on covid-19 by researchers and doctors.	2.2_1	The virus that causes Covid-19 has emerged very recently, but scientists are already very familiar with it. Hundreds of research teams around the world have been working on this disease intensively since the start of the epidemic. More than 150,000 scientific articles have been published on Covid-19 by researchers and doctors.	pro
the genome of the sars-cov-2 virus, which causes covid-19, is now well known, as it was sequenced in its entirety in record time by china, then by researchers around the world (including the uk) who sequence it very regularly to detect possible mutations. in addition, the experience of previous coronaviruses (sars and mers) made it possible to very quickly identify the virus fragments chosen for a vaccine.	2.2_2	The genome of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, is now well known, as it was sequenced in its entirety in record time by China, then by researchers around the world (including the UK) who sequence it very regularly to detect possible mutations. In addition, the experience of previous coronaviruses (SARS and MERS) made it possible to very quickly identify the virus fragments chosen for a vaccine.	pro
thanks to this extraordinary mobilization of the global scientific community, around 200 vaccine projects were working in parallel, and several dozen have made it to clinical evaluation in humans.	2.2_3	Thanks to this extraordinary mobilization of the global scientific community, around 200 vaccine projects were working in parallel, and several dozen have made it to clinical evaluation in humans.	pro
the risk od virus mutation is taken seriously by the health authorities. for example, they ordered the culling of thousands of mink which were feared to be affected by a mutated virus (this mutation was subsequently proven to be harmless).	2.2_4	The risk od virus mutation is taken seriously by the health authorities. For example, they ordered the culling of thousands of mink which were feared to be affected by a mutated virus (this mutation was subsequently proven to be harmless).	pro
mutations are relatively rare because coronaviruses have a mechanism for correcting mutation errors that gives them greater genetic stability (unlike, for example, influenza viruses).	2.2_5	Mutations are relatively rare because coronaviruses have a mechanism for correcting mutation errors that gives them greater genetic stability (unlike, for example, influenza viruses).	pro
most mutations have no effect on the effectiveness of vaccines. since the structure of a mutated virus is usually not sufficiently altered, the first vaccines released could also protect possible mutated versions of the virus. everything suggests that this is the case, for example, of the version of the virus which has mutated and spread in england.	2.2_6	Most mutations have no effect on the effectiveness of vaccines. Since the structure of a mutated virus is usually not sufficiently altered, the first vaccines released could also protect possible mutated versions of the virus. Everything suggests that this is the case, for example, of the version of the virus which has mutated and spread in England.	pro
when a vaccine is said to be effective, it is always in comparison with a placebo, or with a reference vaccine if there is another vaccine whose effectiveness is proven. so when scientists say that a vaccine works, you have to understand “the vaccine is more effective than a placebo”. the effect of a vaccine therefore cannot be a simple placebo effect.	2.3_1	When a vaccine is said to be effective, it is always in comparison with a placebo, or with a reference vaccine if there is another vaccine whose effectiveness is proven. So when scientists say that a vaccine works, you have to understand “the vaccine is more effective than a placebo”. The effect of a vaccine therefore cannot be a simple placebo effect.	pro
the vaccine developed by pfizer and biontech against covid-19 is said to be effective because fewer people were infected with the virus among those vaccinated (8 out of 20,000) than in the control group who received a placebo (162 out of 20,000). the same goes for the moderna vaccine.	2.3_2	The vaccine developed by Pfizer and BioNTech against Covid-19 is said to be effective because fewer people were infected with the virus among those vaccinated (8 out of 20,000) than in the control group who received a placebo (162 out of 20,000). The same goes for the Moderna vaccine.	pro
the vaccines under evaluation are tested intensively before they are marketed.	2.3_3	The vaccines under evaluation are tested intensively before they are marketed.	pro
the effectiveness of the vaccine is measured by comparing the number of new cases of infections among people who received the vaccine against the number of cases of infections among those who received the placebo shot.	2.3_4	The effectiveness of the vaccine is measured by comparing the number of new cases of infections among people who received the vaccine against the number of cases of infections among those who received the placebo shot.	pro
since its inception, vaccination has proven to be incredibly effective. scientists estimate that vaccination saves the lives of 2 million people worldwide each year.	2.4_1	Since its inception, vaccination has proven to be incredibly effective. Scientists estimate that vaccination saves the lives of 2 million people worldwide each year.	pro
since a measles vaccine was introduced in the uk in 1968, public health england estimates that 20 million measles cases and 4,500 deaths have been averted in the uk.	2.4_2	Since a measles vaccine was introduced in the UK in 1968, Public Health England estimates that 20 million measles cases and 4,500 deaths have been averted in the UK.	pro
vaccination is beneficial on an individual level, protecting the person vaccinated, but can also be beneficial on a collective level. when a sufficient part of the population is vaccinated, the pathogen stops circulating.	2.4_3	Vaccination is beneficial on an individual level, protecting the person vaccinated, but can also be beneficial on a collective level. When a sufficient part of the population is vaccinated, the pathogen stops circulating.	pro
this group protection benefits people who have not been able to get vaccinated. this includes people who have a weak immune system such as aids patients, people undergoing cancer treatment, people who have received a transplant, the very old and very young babies.	2.4_4	This group protection benefits people who have not been able to get vaccinated. This includes people who have a weak immune system such as AIDS patients, people undergoing cancer treatment, people who have received a transplant, the very old and very young babies.	pro
advances in medicine, hygiene and nutrition have helped a lot in the fight against infectious diseases, but vaccination is also very important.	2.4_5	Advances in medicine, hygiene and nutrition have helped a lot in the fight against infectious diseases, but vaccination is also very important.	pro
after the introduction of each vaccine, a sharp decrease in the number of cases of the corresponding infectious disease is observed. for example, after the emergence of the polio vaccine, the virus was eliminated in many countries in less than a generation.	2.4_6	After the introduction of each vaccine, a sharp decrease in the number of cases of the corresponding infectious disease is observed. For example, after the emergence of the polio vaccine, the virus was eliminated in many countries in less than a generation.	pro
in the uk, vaccination against measles entered the vaccination calendar in 1968. the rate of measles infection fell sharply after the vaccine was introduced, from over 400,000 cases in 1967 to under 4,000 cases in 1997. however, hygiene and sanitation habits did not change much between 1967 and 1997.	2.4_7	In the UK, vaccination against measles entered the vaccination calendar in 1968. The rate of measles infection fell sharply after the vaccine was introduced, from over 400,000 cases in 1967 to under 4,000 cases in 1997. However, hygiene and sanitation habits did not change much between 1967 and 1997.	pro
the decrease in the measles vaccination rate in recent years has led to an increase in measles cases and deaths, and the uk has lost its ‘measles-free’ status.	2.4_8	The decrease in the measles vaccination rate in recent years has led to an increase in measles cases and deaths, and the UK has lost its ‘measles-free’ status.	pro
despite improved health conditions, some diseases for which no vaccine exists continue to kill hundreds of thousands of people each year (eg malaria). without vaccination, diseases that have become rare, such as whooping cough, could reappear quickly.	2.4_9	Despite improved health conditions, some diseases for which no vaccine exists continue to kill hundreds of thousands of people each year (eg malaria). Without vaccination, diseases that have become rare, such as whooping cough, could reappear quickly.	pro
compared to previous vaccines, the development of vaccines against covid-19 is very rapid. this exceptional speed is due to significant scientific progress in recent years, and to the mobilization of hundreds of research teams and volunteers from all over the world.	3.1_1	Compared to previous vaccines, the development of vaccines against Covid-19 is very rapid. This exceptional speed is due to significant scientific progress in recent years, and to the mobilization of hundreds of research teams and volunteers from all over the world.	pro
the usual obstacles that scientists encounter in terms of funding, recruiting volunteers, and mobilizing qualified personnel have been reduced by mobilizing everyone to find a vaccine quickly.	3.1_2	The usual obstacles that scientists encounter in terms of funding, recruiting volunteers, and mobilizing qualified personnel have been reduced by mobilizing everyone to find a vaccine quickly.	pro
to have a first measure of the effectiveness of the vaccines developed by moderna and pfizer, the health authorities imposed a minimum period of two months between the last injection during clinical trials and the analysis of the first results. the tens of thousands of volunteers who participated in clinical trials are followed for almost two years to detect the appearance of possible very rare side effects.	3.1_3	To have a first measure of the effectiveness of the vaccines developed by Moderna and Pfizer, the health authorities imposed a minimum period of two months between the last injection during clinical trials and the analysis of the first results. The tens of thousands of volunteers who participated in clinical trials are followed for almost two years to detect the appearance of possible very rare side effects.	pro
as of september 2020, the uk vaccination registry had 250,000 volunteers signed up to test potential vaccines against covid-19. in the pfizer trial, 44,000 volunteers participated.	3.1_4	As of September 2020, the UK vaccination registry had 250,000 volunteers signed up to test potential vaccines against Covid-19. In the Pfizer trial, 44,000 volunteers participated.	pro
a serious side effect that would affect more than one in 1,000 people would have already been detected and would have led to the trial being discontinued.	3.1_5	A serious side effect that would affect more than one in 1,000 people would have already been detected and would have led to the trial being discontinued.	pro
standard vaccine monitoring procedures will be followed to monitor the course of possible long-term side effects.	3.1_6	Standard vaccine monitoring procedures will be followed to monitor the course of possible long-term side effects.	pro
the virus that causes covid-19 has emerged very recently, but scientists are already very familiar with it. hundreds of research teams around the world have been working on this disease intensively since the start of the epidemic. more than 150,000 scientific articles have been published on covid-19 by researchers and doctors.	3.1_7	The virus that causes Covid-19 has emerged very recently, but scientists are already very familiar with it. Hundreds of research teams around the world have been working on this disease intensively since the start of the epidemic. More than 150,000 scientific articles have been published on Covid-19 by researchers and doctors.	pro
current vaccines are still protective against the “kent” variant which arose in the uk last winter. the latest evidence suggests current vaccines also provide protection against the recent south african and brazilian variants, and research into the indian variant is ongoing.	3.2_1	current vaccines are still protective against the “Kent” variant which arose in the UK last winter. The latest evidence suggests current vaccines also provide protection against the recent South African and Brazilian variants, and research into the Indian variant is ongoing.	pro
funding is currently in place so that for any major mutation, a new vaccine can be put into circulation. the development and production of this new vaccine can be faster because scientists can build on the experience of the first vaccines. just as, every winter, an influenza vaccine is developed within a few months, because the basic structure of the virus remains the same.	3.2_2	Funding is currently in place so that for any major mutation, a new vaccine can be put into circulation. The development and production of this new vaccine can be faster because scientists can build on the experience of the first vaccines. Just as, every winter, an influenza vaccine is developed within a few months, because the basic structure of the virus remains the same.	pro
everything suggests that the first vaccines available are extremely effective (around 95% effective for pfizer and moderna).	3.2_3	Everything suggests that the first vaccines available are extremely effective (around 95% effective for Pfizer and Moderna).	pro
even when a vaccine is not 100% effective, it is still very useful. studies looking at vaccination against another well-known respiratory virus - the influenza virus - suggest that vaccination helps save lives, even when its effectiveness is moderate.	3.2_4	Even when a vaccine is not 100% effective, it is still very useful. Studies looking at vaccination against another well-known respiratory virus - the influenza virus - suggest that vaccination helps save lives, even when its effectiveness is moderate.	pro
research has provided a good understanding of the mechanisms of the immune response to sars-cov-2, the virus that causes covid-19. however, the duration of immunity after infection with the virus is not yet fully understood. likewise, the duration of immunity provided by the vaccine is not known. by definition, it will take time to know the answer to this question. research will therefore continue in the coming months.	3.3_1	Research has provided a good understanding of the mechanisms of the immune response to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19. However, the duration of immunity after infection with the virus is not yet fully understood. Likewise, the duration of immunity provided by the vaccine is not known. By definition, it will take time to know the answer to this question. Research will therefore continue in the coming months.	pro
antibodies, complex proteins that can detect and destroy pathogens in the body (such as viruses), can disappear after infection. however, immunity is not based only on antibodies, but also on the cellular response.	3.3_2	Antibodies, complex proteins that can detect and destroy pathogens in the body (such as viruses), can disappear after infection. However, immunity is not based only on antibodies, but also on the cellular response.	pro
after being sick or vaccinated, a group of b lymphocytes, called memory cells, remain in the body. b lymphocytes are the cells of the immune system that produce the antibody. in the event of a new infection, these memory lymphocytes will be reactivated and will be able to relaunch a specific, rapid and effective immune response.	3.3_3	After being sick or vaccinated, a group of B lymphocytes, called memory cells, remain in the body. B lymphocytes are the cells of the immune system that produce the antibody. In the event of a new infection, these memory lymphocytes will be reactivated and will be able to relaunch a specific, rapid and effective immune response.	pro
although the long-term effectiveness of the covid-19 vaccines has of course not yet been established, it should last at least a season. reinfections are rare, estimates suggest 1 in 10 may get reinfected but have milder symptoms. thanks to vaccines, this immunity can be strengthened by boosters if necessary.	3.3_4	Although the long-term effectiveness of the Covid-19 vaccines has of course not yet been established, it should last at least a season. Reinfections are rare, estimates suggest 1 in 10 may get reinfected but have milder symptoms. Thanks to vaccines, this immunity can be strengthened by boosters if necessary.	pro
as with any vaccine, very strict rules are in place to ensure that special interests do not influence the production and distribution of the future vaccine. before being placed on the market, a vaccine is checked by the manufacturer, and also by an independent official agency: the european medicines agency and the medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency (mhra).	4.1_1	As with any vaccine, very strict rules are in place to ensure that special interests do not influence the production and distribution of the future vaccine. Before being placed on the market, a vaccine is checked by the manufacturer, and also by an independent official agency: the European Medicines Agency and the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).	pro
other publicly funded researchers independent of pharmaceutical companies play crucial roles throughout vaccine evaluation. for example, hospitals and clinical research centers where vaccines are administered in order to measure their effectiveness during phase 3 of clinical trials are independent of the laboratories that develop the vaccines. these researchers do not have a common financial interest with pharmaceutical laboratories.	4.1_2	Other publicly funded researchers independent of pharmaceutical companies play crucial roles throughout vaccine evaluation. For example, hospitals and clinical research centers where vaccines are administered in order to measure their effectiveness during phase 3 of clinical trials are independent of the laboratories that develop the vaccines. These researchers do not have a common financial interest with pharmaceutical laboratories.	pro
this “vaccine race” is pushing laboratories to develop the most effective and safest vaccine possible because they know their vaccine will undergo rigorous clinical testing, and be compared to vaccines from competing laboratories. in a sense, competition between laboratories stimulates research, and increases the likelihood that a safe and effective vaccine will be readily available.	4.2_1	This “vaccine race” is pushing laboratories to develop the most effective and safest vaccine possible because they know their vaccine will undergo rigorous clinical testing, and be compared to vaccines from competing laboratories. In a sense, competition between laboratories stimulates research, and increases the likelihood that a safe and effective vaccine will be readily available.	pro
manufacturers also resisted certain political pressures in september by signing an agreement saying that they would only submit a vaccine for authorization when they had the data to do so.	4.2_2	Manufacturers also resisted certain political pressures in September by signing an agreement saying that they would only submit a vaccine for authorization when they had the data to do so.	pro
in the uk, the question of the effectiveness of the vaccine belongs to the scientific domain and not to the political domain. this is not the case everywhere. for example, russia said it had developed a vaccine without providing scientific evidence, so it cannot be marketed in europe or the uk.	4.2_3	In the UK, the question of the effectiveness of the vaccine belongs to the scientific domain and not to the political domain. This is not the case everywhere. For example, Russia said it had developed a vaccine without providing scientific evidence, so it cannot be marketed in Europe or the UK.	pro
manufacturers have demonstrated unprecedented transparency in their protocols and methodology. protocols for half a dozen vaccine trials have gone online, which is not normally the case. for covid-19 vaccines, companies have made all of their protocols public, which means anything they say they have done in press releases can be verified.	4.2_4	Manufacturers have demonstrated unprecedented transparency in their protocols and methodology. Protocols for half a dozen vaccine trials have gone online, which is not normally the case. For Covid-19 vaccines, companies have made all of their protocols public, which means anything they say they have done in press releases can be verified.	pro
the question of the effectiveness of the vaccine will be dealt with by independent scientists and experts within the the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation (jcvi) and the medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency (mhra) who will carefully assess the available evidence, regardless of the situation or origin of the vaccine.	4.2_5	The question of the effectiveness of the vaccine will be dealt with by independent scientists and experts within the The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) and the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) who will carefully assess the available evidence, regardless of the situation or origin of the vaccine.	pro
in general, vaccines are less profitable for the pharmaceutical industry than other drugs. in 2017, vaccines represented less than 3% of the global pharmaceutical market.	4.3_1	In general, vaccines are less profitable for the pharmaceutical industry than other drugs. In 2017, vaccines represented less than 3% of the global pharmaceutical market.	pro
in the case of the covid-19 vaccine, the pharmaceutical groups astrazeneca and jonhson & jonhson announced that their vaccine would be made available at cost price, and that they would therefore not make a profit from their vaccines before the end of the pandemic.	4.3_2	In the case of the Covid-19 vaccine, the pharmaceutical groups AstraZeneca and Jonhson & Jonhson announced that their vaccine would be made available at cost price, and that they would therefore not make a profit from their vaccines before the end of the pandemic.	pro
biotech companies that develop certain vaccines (such as biontech or moderna) have seen their stock prices soar in recent months. this does not just reflect the profits that the companies could make on the covid-19 vaccine, but also reflects the extremely promising nature of the technologies developed by these companies.	4.3_3	Biotech companies that develop certain vaccines (such as BioNTech or Moderna) have seen their stock prices soar in recent months. This does not just reflect the profits that the companies could make on the Covid-19 vaccine, but also reflects the extremely promising nature of the technologies developed by these companies.	pro
the vaccine will be provided free of charge to the uk population via the nhs.	4.3_4	The vaccine will be provided free of charge to the UK population via the NHS.	pro
strengthening health systems helps fight covid-19 and mitigate the impact on other diseases. however, even with a health care system that is as strong as possible, the virus will continue to spread and kill in the absence of a vaccine. only an effective vaccine will be able to eradicate the virus and stop the epidemic.	4.4_1	Strengthening health systems helps fight Covid-19 and mitigate the impact on other diseases. However, even with a health care system that is as strong as possible, the virus will continue to spread and kill in the absence of a vaccine. Only an effective vaccine will be able to eradicate the virus and stop the epidemic.	pro
developing a vaccine is the best way to preserve the health system because the vaccine helps prevent people from getting sick. moreover, investing in immunisation does not mean that you should not invest in the health system, the two can go hand in hand.	4.4_2	Developing a vaccine is the best way to preserve the health system because the vaccine helps prevent people from getting sick. Moreover, investing in immunisation does not mean that you should not invest in the health system, the two can go hand in hand.	pro
other means of protection than vaccination exist, such as social distancing, patient isolation, wearing a mask and ventilating rooms. however, in the absence of effective drug treatment against covid-19, these measures have so far proved insufficient to control the spread of the virus. vaccination will therefore play a key role in controlling covid-19.	4.4_3	Other means of protection than vaccination exist, such as social distancing, patient isolation, wearing a mask and ventilating rooms. However, in the absence of effective drug treatment against Covid-19, these measures have so far proved insufficient to control the spread of the virus. Vaccination will therefore play a key role in controlling Covid-19.	pro
a large number of studies have shown that hydroxychloroquine does not reduce the number of deaths in hospitalized covid-19 patients, and that it does not provide any benefit for people with a moderate form of disease (who). in addition, its use in the absence of medical supervision can cause serious side effects.	4.4_4	A large number of studies have shown that hydroxychloroquine does not reduce the number of deaths in hospitalized Covid-19 patients, and that it does not provide any benefit for people with a moderate form of disease (WHO). In addition, its use in the absence of medical supervision can cause serious side effects.	pro
there are several promising drugs being developed at the moment, such as antivirals and dexamethasone, but none have yet finished the medical trials necessary to be approved.	4.4_5	There are several promising drugs being developed at the moment, such as antivirals and dexamethasone, but none have yet finished the medical trials necessary to be approved.	pro
some people are at greater risk of developing severe symptoms from covid-19, but the severe or chronic effects of the disease can occur at any age, regardless of our physical condition. severe forms of the disease are associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome and cardiovascular or neurological consequences such as encephalopathy (inflammation of the brain).	5.1_1	Some people are at greater risk of developing severe symptoms from Covid-19, but the severe or chronic effects of the disease can occur at any age, regardless of our physical condition. Severe forms of the disease are associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome and cardiovascular or neurological consequences such as encephalopathy (inflammation of the brain).	pro
a number of people who have not yet developed a severe form of the disease have chronic conditions, such as persistent fatigue, difficulty breathing and a lasting loss of taste and smell.	5.1_2	A number of people who have not yet developed a severe form of the disease have chronic conditions, such as persistent fatigue, difficulty breathing and a lasting loss of taste and smell.	pro
most vaccines also play a major role in stopping the spread of viruses. by getting vaccinated, we protect ourselves against diseases but we also protect others because we block the circulation of viruses.	5.1_3	Most vaccines also play a major role in stopping the spread of viruses. By getting vaccinated, we protect ourselves against diseases but we also protect others because we block the circulation of viruses.	pro
the challenge is also to protect the health system. by protecting themselves from serious forms, each person vaccinated contributes to the protection of the health system.	5.1_4	The challenge is also to protect the health system. By protecting themselves from serious forms, each person vaccinated contributes to the protection of the health system.	pro
covid-19 has been the deadliest infectious disease in the west for decades. in less than a year, more than a million and a half people died worldwide from covid-19	5.1_5	Covid-19 has been the deadliest infectious disease in the West for decades. In less than a year, more than a million and a half people died worldwide from Covid-19	pro
the long-term effects of covid-19 are not yet known because this disease has only existed since early 2020. however, we are starting to observe certain complications at the cardiac, neurological, metabolic or respiratory levels.	5.1_6	The long-term effects of Covid-19 are not yet known because this disease has only existed since early 2020. However, we are starting to observe certain complications at the cardiac, neurological, metabolic or respiratory levels.	pro
we have enough data now to know that covid-19 is much more dangerous than the flu, and that infection can lead to persistent symptoms, including in young and healthy people.	5.1_7	We have enough data now to know that Covid-19 is much more dangerous than the flu, and that infection can lead to persistent symptoms, including in young and healthy people.	pro
the likelihood of developing a severe form of covid-19 or even dying from this disease when you are young and in good health is low. however, in an epidemic affecting millions of people, even events with a low probability of occurring will affect a large number of people.	5.2_1	The likelihood of developing a severe form of Covid-19 or even dying from this disease when you are young and in good health is low. However, in an epidemic affecting millions of people, even events with a low probability of occurring will affect a large number of people.	pro
even in people who are not particularly at risk, covid-19 can cause disabling symptoms (shortness of breath, loss of taste and smell) or serious complications (fatigue, respiratory discomfort, joint or chest pain), even death. for example, a quarter of icu admissions are people under the age of 65.	5.2_2	Even in people who are not particularly at risk, Covid-19 can cause disabling symptoms (shortness of breath, loss of taste and smell) or serious complications (fatigue, respiratory discomfort, joint or chest pain), even death. For example, a quarter of ICU admissions are people under the age of 65.	pro
infected people of all age groups - including young people - can transmit the virus even if they do not feel sick. this is probably how the second wave started this autumn.	5.2_3	Infected people of all age groups - including young people - can transmit the virus even if they do not feel sick. This is probably how the second wave started this autumn.	pro
younger people can pass covid-19 to people at risk, who are more likely to get seriously ill or die. on the other hand, people at risk can also be those who cannot be vaccinated, and who must therefore rely on others to protect them.	5.2_4	Younger people can pass Covid-19 to people at risk, who are more likely to get seriously ill or die. On the other hand, people at risk can also be those who cannot be vaccinated, and who must therefore rely on others to protect them.	pro
the consequences of the epidemic (isolation, delayed care, unemployment and loss of income, etc.) concern all age groups. a collective effort, and not just of the most vulnerable people, is therefore crucial.	5.2_5	The consequences of the epidemic (isolation, delayed care, unemployment and loss of income, etc.) concern all age groups. A collective effort, and not just of the most vulnerable people, is therefore crucial.	pro
coronavirus infection may not provide permanent immunity and naturally acquired immunity may need to be enhanced by vaccination. injections of the vaccine may help maintain immunity more safely than possible re-infections with the virus itself.	5.2_6	Coronavirus infection may not provide permanent immunity and naturally acquired immunity may need to be enhanced by vaccination. Injections of the vaccine may help maintain immunity more safely than possible re-infections with the virus itself.	pro
unfortunately, physical methods cannot be maintained permanently. for example, wearing a mask is not possible in bars and restaurants, or during family meals. in addition, the restrictive measures are weighing heavily on the economy, leading to other difficulties such as rising unemployment.	5.3_1	Unfortunately, physical methods cannot be maintained permanently. For example, wearing a mask is not possible in bars and restaurants, or during family meals. In addition, the restrictive measures are weighing heavily on the economy, leading to other difficulties such as rising unemployment.	pro
to control the pandemic and return to a normal life, without wearing a general mask, curfew, or regular lockdowns, a vaccine is essential.	5.3_2	To control the pandemic and return to a normal life, without wearing a general mask, curfew, or regular lockdowns, a vaccine is essential.	pro
there is a scientific consensus that natural herd immunity cannot be relied on to fight covid-19. it is a dangerous idea that is not supported by scientific evidence.	5.4_1	There is a scientific consensus that natural herd immunity cannot be relied on to fight Covid-19. It is a dangerous idea that is not supported by scientific evidence.	pro
in the uk, only 6% of the population had been infected by the end of the “first wave” in the spring. in february 2021, modeling by imperial college london indicated that around 14% of the population had been infected since the start of the pandemic. it would therefore be necessary that another 55 to 75% of the population be infected to obtain herd immunity in a “natural” way.	5.4_2	In the UK, only 6% of the population had been infected by the end of the “first wave” in the spring. In February 2021, modeling by Imperial College London indicated that around 14% of the population had been infected since the start of the pandemic. It would therefore be necessary that another 55 to 75% of the population be infected to obtain herd immunity in a “natural” way.	pro
it is clear to all the experts that achieving herd immunity without vaccination represents far too many patients for hospital structures - in the uk or elsewhere - to be able to treat the number of complications of the disease.	5.4_3	It is clear to all the experts that achieving herd immunity without vaccination represents far too many patients for hospital structures - in the UK or elsewhere - to be able to treat the number of complications of the disease.	pro
in trying to achieve herd immunity by infecting a large part of the population, the sick would overwhelm hospitals and many people would lose their lives, as well as patients with other diseases that could not be treated.	5.4_4	In trying to achieve herd immunity by infecting a large part of the population, the sick would overwhelm hospitals and many people would lose their lives, as well as patients with other diseases that could not be treated.	pro
it has not been approved by the fda therefore we don't have certainty on how safe it is	itt_1	It has not been approved by the FDA therefore we don't have certainty on how safe it is	con
it's still in stage 2 trials, so the trials haven't been completed so something me go wrong in later stages.	itt_2	It's still in stage 2 trials, so the trials haven't been completed so something me go wrong in later stages.	con
because there have been no long term clinical trials, therefore no knowing of what damage it could cause.	itt_3	Because there have been no long term clinical trials, therefore no knowing of what damage it could cause.	con
the clinical trials have not gone on for 2 years yet. the timeline for this is september 2022.	itt_4	The clinical trials have not gone on for 2 years yet. The timeline for this is September 2022.	con
they are worried that the current studies have only assessed side effects for up to 2 months - what are the long term side effects of this? doctors have already stated they do not know, as there is not enough evidence. e.g. how is fertility effected?	itt_5	They are worried that the current studies have only assessed side effects for up to 2 months - what are the long term side effects of this? Doctors have already stated they do not know, as there is not enough evidence. E.g. how is fertility effected?	con
they think that coronavirus is not serious, similar to the flu, and therefore it's not needed as our bodies have their own immune system capable of dealing with it	itt_6	They think that coronavirus is not serious, similar to the flu, and therefore it's not needed as our bodies have their own immune system capable of dealing with it	con
these vaccines are still in a clinical trial until 2023, with no liability if anything should happen to me	itt_7	These vaccines are still in a clinical trial until 2023, with no liability if anything should happen to me	con
there is not enough clear information as to the ingredients in the vaccine or possible side-effects, risks associated	itt_8	There is not enough clear information as to the ingredients in the vaccine or possible side-effects, risks associated	con
mainstream media are not reporting any cases of adverse effects and things seem to be one-sided	itt_9	Mainstream media are not reporting any cases of adverse effects and things seem to be one-sided	con
do not have it because it's just another vaccine that is they want to trap you in.	itt_10	Do not have it because it's just another vaccine that is they want to trap you in.	con
they think it could be unsafe in the long term, because the long term effects have not been tested.	itt_11	They think it could be unsafe in the long term, because the long term effects have not been tested.	con
they think they don't need it, because they have blood group o and they have read that people with this blood group are far less likely to get infected or have complications if they do get infected.	itt_12	They think they don't need it, because they have blood group O and they have read that people with this blood group are far less likely to get infected or have complications if they do get infected.	con
they are young (30-40) so by the time older people have all been vaccinated, there will be less chance of getting infected or spreading the virus because over half the population has been vaccinated.	itt_13	They are young (30-40) so by the time older people have all been vaccinated, there will be less chance of getting infected or spreading the virus because over half the population has been vaccinated.	con
there was not enough time to develop these vaccines and test them. the long term side effects of a brand new technology will show years later.	itt_14	There was not enough time to develop these vaccines and test them. The long term side effects of a brand new technology will show years later.	con
14% of people got sick and that is why 75% needs to get the vaccine? why some people do not get sick? feels like no one checked that.	itt_15	14% of people got sick and that is why 75% needs to get the vaccine? Why some people do not get sick? Feels like no one checked that.	con
there are so many different vaccines to chose from, all has some issues. instead of them, the scientist could just develop 1 perfect one.	itt_16	There are so many different vaccines to chose from, all has some issues. Instead of them, the scientist could just develop 1 perfect one.	con
it is still in a clinical trial phase with final results not due from initial participants in trials until 2023	itt_17	It is still in a clinical trial phase with final results not due from initial participants in trials until 2023	con
it can cause more harm than good. we don't know what's actually in it and if it could cause any bad reactions.	itt_18	It can cause more harm than good. We don't know what's actually in it and if it could cause any bad reactions.	con
there may be long term consequences from the vaccine that you may not see immediately, but in the next decade or so.	itt_19	There may be long term consequences from the vaccine that you may not see immediately, but in the next decade or so.	con
my age group is at an incredibly low risk of serious illness or death from covid	itt_20	My age group is at an incredibly low risk of serious illness or death from COVID	con
vaccine is 95% effective but my own imune system is more effective as covid has a 99%+ survival rate	itt_21	Vaccine is 95% effective but my own imune system is more effective as COVID has a 99%+ survival rate	con
the risk of side effects is too great. the vaccines have not been tested well enough.	itt_22	The risk of side effects is too great. The vaccines have not been tested well enough.	con
additional possible side effects after getting the vaccine - there are studies showing young people have died after getting the vaccine	itt_23	Additional possible side effects after getting the vaccine - there are studies showing young people have died after getting the vaccine	con
do not believe that they need a vaccine and that their body can fight it naturally	itt_24	do not believe that they need a vaccine and that their body can fight it naturally	con
they want to see the effects it will have in 5 to 10 years to know the long term effects	itt_25	They want to see the effects it will have in 5 to 10 years to know the long term effects	con
no one they know has shown any impact of covid so they believe the impact shown on the news is exaggerated	itt_26	No one they know has shown any impact of Covid so they believe the impact shown on the news is exaggerated	con
mrna was tested on animals, when the animals were reinfected they all died, the mrna was not licenced because of this and was put on the back burner	itt_27	mrna was tested on animals, when the animals were reinfected they all died, the mrna was not licenced because of this and was put on the back burner	con
there is no data on this treatment, say a year or 2 from now, so its still in trials, human trials, we are not collecting data on side effects, vaars is all over the place,	itt_28	there is no data on this treatment, say a year or 2 from now, so its still in trials, human trials, we are not collecting data on side effects, vaars is all over the place,	con
this is not a vaccine, it doesnt stop u getting covid or spreading, its called a vaccine to get it through the emergency back door, this is not a licensed product, we are in the midst of human trials	itt_29	this is not a vaccine, it doesnt stop u getting covid or spreading, its called a vaccine to get it through the emergency back door, this is not a licensed product, we are in the midst of human trials	con
the long term effects of the covid 19 vaccine are yet to be determined. there is already some, albeit limited, concern regarding blood clots.	itt_30	The long term effects of the Covid 19 vaccine are yet to be determined. There is already some, albeit limited, concern regarding blood clots.	con
the response to covid 19 has been out of all proportion to the actual, rather than perceived, threat it poses to the whole population. much of this has been driven by media fear-mongering.	itt_31	The response to Covid 19 has been out of all proportion to the actual, rather than perceived, threat it poses to the whole population. Much of this has been driven by Media fear-mongering.	con
covid 19 is a man-made virus from wuhan. the who stated it was natural but there are now reports from independent journalists, especially in australia, calling this into question.	itt_32	Covid 19 is a man-made virus from Wuhan. The WHO stated it was natural but there are now reports from independent journalists, especially in Australia, calling this into question.	con
not in a high risk group for covid so willing to take a chance with the virus rather than having a vaccine	itt_33	Not in a high risk group for Covid so willing to take a chance with the virus rather than having a vaccine	con
the level of pressure from government, the media, etc. to vaccinate the entire population seems out of proportion with the actual danger from the new flu, which makes me more resistant to a vaccine.	itt_34	The level of pressure from government, the media, etc. to vaccinate the entire population seems out of proportion with the actual danger from the new flu, which makes me more resistant to a vaccine.	con
too many records of adverse side affects for example; blood clots which resulted in a vaccine being withdrawn	itt_35	Too many records of adverse side affects for example; blood clots which resulted in a vaccine being withdrawn	con
personal choice - maybe this person does not want to be dictated too or believe everything they read in the media.  maybe the person would rather make their own decisions and do their own research.	itt_36	personal choice - maybe this person does not want to be dictated too or believe everything they read in the media.  Maybe the person would rather make their own decisions and do their own research.	con
do not trust data statistics eg: how many people have really died, "28 days of covid diagnosis" is far from true number	itt_37	Do not trust data statistics eg: how many people have really died, "28 days of covid diagnosis" is far from true number	con
vaccine and testing are not proven to be effective and accurate. if safe why did teachers, frontline staff, army and police get jabs first	itt_38	Vaccine and testing are not proven to be effective and accurate. If safe why did teachers, frontline staff, army and police get jabs first	con
they are worried that it hasn't been trialled enough, and that it has been rushed through as well?	itt_39	They are worried that it hasn't been trialled enough, and that it has been rushed through as well?	con
information being given by professionals & governments has been inconsistent at best and contradicts the evidence (ie. downward trend in transmission rates "slowing" since vaccine programmes started).	itt_40	Information being given by professionals & governments has been inconsistent at best and contradicts the evidence (ie. downward trend in transmission rates "slowing" since vaccine programmes started).	con
fears of a more devastating third wave due to people believing they have immunity to the virus when there seems to be no definitive evidence that is the case.	itt_41	Fears of a more devastating third wave due to people believing they have immunity to the virus when there seems to be no definitive evidence that is the case.	con
erosion of trust in advice from health professionals, scientists and governments on the subject of covid-19 vaccines and other covid related information.	itt_42	Erosion of trust in advice from health professionals, scientists and governments on the subject of covid-19 vaccines and other covid related information.	con
the covid vaccines were developed to quickly, how come they have not developed vaccines for cancer and other diseases yet they have money to invest in covid and come up with a vaccine too quickly	itt_43	The covid vaccines were developed to quickly, how come they have not developed vaccines for cancer and other diseases yet they have money to invest in covid and come up with a vaccine too quickly	con
the vaccine does not prevent one from infection and some vaccines do not protect you from other strains, there is talk of getting vaccinated every year so what is the point?	itt_44	The vaccine does not prevent one from infection and some vaccines do not protect you from other strains, there is talk of getting vaccinated every year so what is the point?	con
vaccinations aren't just designed to protect from illness, but the people designing them have other intentions.	itt_45	Vaccinations aren't just designed to protect from illness, but the people designing them have other intentions.	con
it is only life-threatening to senior citizens, therefore the immune system provides adequate protection and vaccines are totally unnecessary for the whole population.	itt_46	It is only life-threatening to senior citizens, therefore the immune system provides adequate protection and vaccines are totally unnecessary for the whole population.	con
the vaccine is classed as "experimental" by the regulatory body, the mhra. human populations are being subjected to an experimental drug which is abhorrent, immoral and criminal.	itt_47	The vaccine is classed as "experimental" by the regulatory body, the MHRA. Human populations are being subjected to an experimental drug which is abhorrent, immoral and criminal.	con
it doesn't protect against all variants and for all we know there still might be stronger variants to come	itt_48	It doesn't protect against all variants and for all we know there still might be stronger variants to come	con
only certain vaccines are available to them currently and so they want to wait until they possibly do become available.	itt_49	Only certain vaccines are available to them currently and so they want to wait until they possibly do become available.	con
they don't plan to travel so see no need to get the vaccine if the country they live in is doing pretty well at this current stage.	itt_50	They don't plan to travel so see no need to get the vaccine if the country they live in is doing pretty well at this current stage.	con
the vaccine is only so effective against covid so there's a chance that you'll still catch it.	itt_51	The vaccine is only so effective against Covid so there's a chance that you'll still catch it.	con
death numbers given are entirely unscientific because they include anyone who has died within 28 days of having a dubious covid test, not whether they have actually died of covid, as opposed to with.	itt_52	Death numbers given are entirely unscientific because they include anyone who has died within 28 days of having a dubious covid test, not whether they have actually died OF covid, as opposed to WITH.	con
they have already had the virus. the notion that someone who has had the virus can get it again is so vanishingly rare as to be insignificant, and used as persuasion to get the vaccine is wrong.	itt_53	They have already had the virus. The notion that someone who has had the virus can get it again is so vanishingly rare as to be insignificant, and used as persuasion to get the vaccine is wrong.	con
they are too young and healthy. they chances of them dying or even getting seriously ill are again vanishingly small and it shouldn't be portrayed as a risk to the young.	itt_54	They are too young and healthy. They chances of them dying or even getting seriously ill are again vanishingly small and it shouldn't be portrayed as a risk to the young.	con
the speed in which the vaccine was made has made them nervous about taking it. they don't believe that a vaccine made this quickly would not be safe and they think corners must have been cut  to make	itt_55	The speed in which the vaccine was made has made them nervous about taking it. They don't believe that a vaccine made this quickly would not be safe and they think corners must have been cut  to make	con
the vaccine has been causing blood clots in people. they most worrying things is why did they not know about it and if they did have any concerns why did they not tell the public	itt_56	The vaccine has been causing blood clots in people. They most worrying things is why did they not know about it and if they did have any concerns why did they not tell the public	con
nobody knows the long term effect and with the blood clot issue what seems to be a surprise to the makers of the vaccine. who know that else could be a unknown later on down the line	itt_57	Nobody knows the long term effect and with the blood clot issue what seems to be a surprise to the makers of the vaccine. Who know that else could be a unknown later on down the line	con
the clinical trials are not finished and millions are not being monitored for their reaction or being reported properly	itt_58	the clinical trials are not finished and millions are not being monitored for their reaction or being reported properly	con
are you being brainwashed by the media? media is the main culprint in spreading false information to forward the agenda of vaccinating people.  forward their de-population global re-set agenda.	itt_59	Are you being brainwashed by the media? Media is the main culprint in spreading false information to forward the agenda of vaccinating people.  forward their de-population global re-set agenda.	con
this injection is still in its third phase trial, for pfizer this third trial ends by jan 2023 and others in 2022. despite this they have injected millions of people( fourth trial). media is lying.	itt_60	This injection is still in its third phase trial, for Pfizer this third trial ends by Jan 2023 and others in 2022. despite this they have injected millions of people( fourth trial). Media is lying.	con
do you have the informed consent?everbody should be given informed consent about the side effects of this injection (it is not vaccine).  which they have not. the sold media is hiding the side effect	itt_61	Do you have the informed consent?Everbody should be given informed consent about the side effects of this injection (it is not vaccine).  Which they have not. The sold Media is hiding the side effect	con
the pharma companies cannot be trusted. they have trialled vaccines in other countries and people have died from the vaccine.	itt_62	The pharma companies cannot be trusted. They have trialled vaccines in other countries and people have died from the vaccine.	con
the vaccine is not actually a vaccine as it does not contain any of the virus. it contains mrna which can change someones dna.	itt_63	The vaccine is not actually a vaccine as it does not contain any of the virus. It contains MRNA which can change someones DNA.	con
doctors that are against the vaccine are being silenced. these are doctors/virologists with years of experience.	itt_64	Doctors that are against the vaccine are being silenced. These are doctors/virologists with years of experience.	con
the astrazeneca can cause blood clots (mostly affecting young people) which can result in serious life changing effects or death.	itt_65	The AstraZeneca can cause blood clots (mostly affecting young people) which can result in serious life changing effects or death.	con
there is not enough data to prove what side-effects the vaccine has had, and historical vaccine incidents has shown that the correlation between side-effects and a vaccine has appeared many years afte	itt_66	There is not enough data to prove what side-effects the vaccine has had, and historical vaccine incidents has shown that the correlation between side-effects and a vaccine has appeared many years afte	con
they don't see the need, they think that our immune system should be able to fight it and develop as result.	itt_67	They don't see the need, they think that our immune system should be able to fight it and develop as result.	con
people are only focused on the number of deaths, rather than those who have had the virus and recovered.	itt_68	People are only focused on the number of deaths, rather than those who have had the virus and recovered.	con
more people die every year from the seasonal flu than have died from the covid virus	itt_69	More people die every year from the seasonal flu than have died from the Covid virus	con
having the vaccine will not stop them from having to socially distance, wear a mask indoors or from having to comply with all government regulations around the covid pandemic.	itt_70	Having the vaccine will not stop them from having to socially distance, wear a mask indoors or from having to comply with all government regulations around the covid pandemic.	con
they do not feel at risk.  there is no medical need for healthy individuals to have the vaccine.	itt_71	They do not feel at risk.  There is no medical need for healthy individuals to have the vaccine.	con
the health and lives of younger people are being sacrificed to save older and vulnerable people. more damage is being done through restrictions i.e. mental health crises	itt_72	The health and lives of younger people are being sacrificed to save older and vulnerable people. More damage is being done through restrictions i.e. mental health crises	con
the az restrictions show that there are untested impacts of the vaccine and there is no substitute for longer term testing.  it is still only approved for emergency use.	itt_73	The AZ restrictions show that there are untested impacts of the vaccine and there is no substitute for longer term testing.  It is still only approved for emergency use.	con
how effective is it as already the government are indicating lockdown may have to be extended, so what is the point of the vaccine.	itt_74	How effective is it as already the government are indicating lockdown may have to be extended, so what is the point of the vaccine.	con
it hasn't been tested for long enough, we do not know the long term side effects	itt_75	It hasn't been tested for long enough, we do not know the long term side effects	con
the vaccines are still in phase 3 trials, not due to be completed until 2023. we don't have knowledge of long term side effects.	itt_76	The vaccines are still in phase 3 trials, not due to be completed until 2023. We don't have knowledge of long term side effects.	con
if all the vulnerable and elderly get the vaccine why should it be my personal responsibility to put myself even at low risk of adverse side effects?	itt_77	If all the vulnerable and elderly get the vaccine why should it be my personal responsibility to put myself even at low risk of adverse side effects?	con
taking an experimental drug for an illness that has high survival rate in my age group	itt_78	Taking an experimental drug for an illness that has high survival rate in my age group	con
vaccines usually take 15-20 years to be fully developed with understanding of short termand long term side effects	itt_79	Vaccines usually take 15-20 years to be fully developed with understanding of short termand long term side effects	con
they rushed the production, companies have made millions developing a vaccine an they have come out way to fast then what the norm is	itt_80	They rushed the production, companies have made millions developing a vaccine an they have come out way to fast then what the norm is	con
would you put something in your body without fully understanding how its going to affect you positively and negatively also wether it develops immunity or mutates etc	itt_81	Would you put something in your body without fully understanding how its going to affect you positively and negatively also wether it develops immunity or mutates etc	con
they're worried about the side effects from the vaccine especially if they have underlying health conditions that can be affected through the vaccine.	itt_82	They're worried about the side effects from the vaccine especially if they have underlying health conditions that can be affected through the vaccine.	con
doesn't seem trustworthy as the process to make the vaccine has been rushed in order to keep up with demands from the world to release a vaccine out soon.	itt_83	Doesn't seem trustworthy as the process to make the vaccine has been rushed in order to keep up with demands from the world to release a vaccine out soon.	con
theories about how the vaccine has been produced, the ingredients of it, seems suspicious and doesn't seem to be effective either.	itt_84	Theories about how the vaccine has been produced, the ingredients of it, seems suspicious and doesn't seem to be effective either.	con
the risk of dying from covid is only 0.03% unless you have an underlying health problem.	itt_85	The risk of dying from Covid is only 0.03% unless you have an underlying health problem.	con
it is a new technology that was considered unethical before thats why it was never passed	itt_86	It is a new technology that was considered unethical before thats why it was never passed	con
they would rather wait to see if there are any negative effect in people who have had the vaccine before they make up their mind	itt_87	They would rather wait to see if there are any negative effect in people who have had the vaccine before they make up their mind	con
they would like to see the figures for people who have died within 28 days of having a vaccine, not just the number of deaths after having a positive test	itt_88	They would like to see the figures for people who have died within 28 days of having a vaccine, not just the number of deaths after having a positive test	con
they don't trust the government and what they are trying to put into our body/why they are being so forceful.	itt_89	They don't trust the government and what they are trying to put into our body/why they are being so forceful.	con
there have been adverse side effects other than the blood clots mentioned in the news,news does not provide all needed information regarding the side effects of the vaccination,including infertility.	itt_90	There have been adverse side effects other than the blood clots mentioned in the news,news does not provide all needed information regarding the side effects of the vaccination,including infertility.	con
vaccine is in it's infancy. like you said, "the long-term effects of covid-19 are not yet known because this disease has only existed since early 2020." that same statement can be applied to the vacci	itt_91	Vaccine is in it's infancy. Like you said, "The long-term effects of Covid-19 are not yet known because this disease has only existed since early 2020." That same statement can be applied to the vacci	con
the constant changing of what works, what doesn't, who it affects, who it doesn't. they don't really know for sure, do they?	itt_92	The constant changing of what works, what doesn't, who it affects, who it doesn't. They don't really know for sure, do they?	con
it hasn't been long enough to test the long tern side effects, and already the side effects are concerning	itt_93	It hasn't been long enough to test the long tern side effects, and already the side effects are concerning	con
the vaccine doesn't make you less likely to catch covid-19 it just means you will have a less severe reaction to it. if you are not at risk then why risk the side effects.	itt_94	The vaccine doesn't make you less likely to catch Covid-19 it just means you will have a less severe reaction to it. If you are not at risk then why risk the side effects.	con
we haven't trusted the government for years why should be trust them now after they've made so many bad descisions in the pandemic.	itt_95	We haven't trusted the government for years why should be trust them now after they've made so many bad descisions in the pandemic.	con
it's an mrna gened-editing overkill for a flu which is less treat to your health than an experimental injection with potential for serious adverse effect including the potential for cytokine storm.	itt_96	It's an mRNA gened-editing overkill for a flu which is less treat to your health than an experimental injection with potential for serious adverse effect including the potential for cytokine storm.	con
there are already reports from all over the world, of horrendous adverse consequences to the injection. in addition, thousands of scientist have warned of the unnecessary and dangerous nature.	itt_97	There are already reports from all over the world, of horrendous adverse consequences to the injection. In addition, thousands of scientist have warned of the unnecessary and dangerous nature.	con
the government keeps lying , which gives me no reason whats so every to think they are telling the truth about the vaccine.	itt_98	the government keeps lying , Which gives me no reason whats so every to think they are telling the truth about the vaccine.	con
the government is so desperate to get this vaccine into people, they are using so much  covid propaganda,  people are neither scad out of there mind, or realize  something is just not right.	itt_99	the government is so desperate to get this vaccine into people, they are using so much  covid propaganda,  people are neither scad out of there mind, or realize  something is just not right.	con
it's not safe. because of the viral videos of people passing out and the conspiracy theories of trolls on the internet instigating doubts.	itt_100	It's not safe. Because of the viral videos of people passing out and the conspiracy theories of trolls on the internet instigating doubts.	con
the doctors are not to be trusted as they're only interested in increasing the daily infection rate counts.	itt_101	The doctors are not to be trusted as they're only interested in increasing the daily infection rate counts.	con
not been clearly tested over a long period and still being tested hence being called clinical trials.	itt_102	Not been clearly tested over a long period and still being tested hence being called clinical trials.	con
being pushed by government and they can't be trusted as gone against expert advice in the past	itt_103	Being pushed by government and they can't be trusted as gone against expert advice in the past	con
produced too quickly when they've had years to develop a cure for other diseases and failed	itt_104	Produced too quickly when they've had years to develop a cure for other diseases and failed	con
they do not want the side effects associated with the virus, such as blood clots, to effect them	itt_105	They do not want the side effects associated with the virus, such as blood clots, to effect them	con
they do not trust how quickly the vaccine has been processed, neither who has made them	itt_106	They do not trust how quickly the vaccine has been processed, neither who has made them	con
overly quick development period: it was developed to rapidly and it is unknown if there will be any long term issues with it.	itt_107	Overly quick development period: It was developed to rapidly and it is unknown if there will be any long term issues with it.	con
not effective against this coronavirus: coronaviruses have been around for a very long time and we have never been able to produce an effective vaccine against them and yet suddenly we have eleven.	itt_108	Not effective against this Coronavirus: Coronaviruses have been around for a very long time and we have never been able to produce an effective vaccine against them and yet suddenly we have eleven.	con
rna vaccines aren't safe: in initial trials of the rna technology resulted in the death of all the animals it was trialed on. this untested method of vaccination will likely damage human immune system	itt_109	RNA vaccines aren't safe: In initial trials of the RNA technology resulted in the death of all the animals it was trialed on. This untested method of vaccination will likely damage human immune system	con
covide-19 vaccine is not safe enough and they don't know how does it work in long term,	itt_110	Covide-19 vaccine is not safe enough and they don't know how does it work in long term,	con
they can defeat this virus with their own antibodies. they are enough healthy to evercome it.	itt_111	They can defeat this virus with their own antibodies. They are enough healthy to evercome it.	con
the vaccine can make you ill with part of the virus where you were otherwise immune anyway	itt_112	The vaccine can make you ill with part of the virus where you were otherwise immune anyway	con
it has not been tested and we do not know the long term side effects from all the additives	itt_113	It has not been tested and we do not know the long term side effects from all the additives	con
they're anti vaxxers and would prefer more 'natural' methods of treating covid should they catch it.	itt_114	They're anti vaxxers and would prefer more 'natural' methods of treating covid should they catch it.	con
millions of people around the world have not died of covid, they would have died anyway but happened to have the bug in them as well which had ho effect on their health.	itt_115	Millions of people around the world have NOT died OF covid, they would have died anyway but happened to have the bug in them as well which had ho effect on their health.	con
no two adults have had the vaccine then created a baby that has then been born without any issues - there simply has not been enough time so it is impossible to say if that baby would be ok.	itt_116	No two adults have had the vaccine then created a baby that has then been born without any issues - there simply has not been enough time so it is impossible to say if that baby would be ok.	con
vaccines take up to a decade to be safely trialled - this one has had around 9 months so there is no way all possible issues have been addressed.	itt_117	Vaccines take up to a decade to be safely trialled - this one has had around 9 months so there is no way all possible issues have been addressed.	con
matt hancock made an announcement on the 16th of may that people that have taken the two vaccine doses ''may still die'' as indian variant spreads.	itt_118	Matt Hancock made an announcement on the 16th of May that people that have taken the two vaccine doses ''may still die'' as Indian variant spreads.	con
hundreds of reports of serious reactions to the vaccine and even deaths. it takes a few moment on google to discover these vaccines are not safe and do not even work according to matt hancock.	itt_119	Hundreds of reports of serious reactions to the vaccine and even deaths. It takes a few moment on google to discover these vaccines are not safe and do not even work according to Matt Hancock.	con
it does not make sense to receive a vaccine for a virus that has over 95% recovery rate!	itt_120	It does not make sense to receive a vaccine for a virus that has over 95% recovery rate!	con
instead of vaccines, drugs should be developed to help cure people who fall sick from covid.	itt_121	Instead of vaccines, drugs should be developed to help cure people who fall sick from Covid.	con
why have the producers of the vaccine been exonerated from any form of liability arising from any effect/death as a result of taking the vaccine, if they're saying its safe and effective?	itt_122	Why have the producers of the vaccine been exonerated from any form of liability arising from any effect/death as a result of taking the vaccine, if they're saying its safe and effective?	con
they are young and healthy, therefore they are extremely low risk at developing serious complications from covid	itt_123	They are young and healthy, therefore they are extremely low risk at developing serious complications from COVID	con
they are not sure about the testing and long term effects (both positive and negative) of the vaccine.	itt_124	They are not sure about the testing and long term effects (both positive and negative) of the vaccine.	con
breastfeeding and not enough trials/evidence to support the effects of potential transmission to my baby through milk	itt_125	Breastfeeding and not enough trials/evidence to support the effects of potential transmission to my baby through milk	con
they don't want it because it has been massed produced under a year, when it takes on average 10 years to produce a vaccine for public release.	itt_126	They don't want it because it has been massed produced under a year, when it takes on average 10 years to produce a vaccine for public release.	con
nanoparticles within the vaccine, mrna changing dna within the human body. multiple videos on the internet showing adverse reactions to the vaccine	itt_127	Nanoparticles within the vaccine, MRNA changing DNA within the human body. Multiple videos on the internet showing adverse reactions to the vaccine	con
companies offering incentives to get the vaccine. videos showing metal sticking to the arms of people in the position where the jab was taken- feels very suspect and untrustworthy promotion.	itt_128	Companies offering incentives to get the vaccine. Videos showing metal sticking to the arms of people in the position where the jab was taken- feels very suspect and untrustworthy promotion.	con
the vaccine trials have caused some very adverse reactions, ongoing complications, and even death. some covid vaccine manufacturers have even stated these dangers themselves.	itt_129	The vaccine trials have caused some very adverse reactions, ongoing complications, and even death. Some covid vaccine manufacturers have even stated these dangers themselves.	con
rna vaccines are new, and past trials and tests with them on animals were unsuccessful, with many animal deaths from them. rna vaccines can be dangerous and the long-term effects are unknown.	itt_130	RNA vaccines are new, and past trials and tests with them on animals were unsuccessful, with many animal deaths from them. RNA vaccines can be dangerous and the long-term effects are unknown.	con
everyone, including the pharma companies aren't clear about possible side effects and the billion dollar shady pharma companies are immune from law suits from side effects or deaths.	itt_131	Everyone, including the pharma companies aren't clear about possible side effects and the billion dollar shady pharma companies are immune from law suits from side effects or deaths.	con
the vaccine does not give you full immunity ....you can still catch and transmit the virus after being vaccinated .	itt_132	The vaccine does not give you full immunity ....you can still catch and transmit the virus after being vaccinated .	con
we don't yet know if there are any long term side effect of the vaccine, or how long it will stay effective, there just hasn't been time to test any of this.	itt_133	We don't yet know if there are any long term side effect of the vaccine, or how long it will stay effective, there just hasn't been time to test any of this.	con
even though the development of the vaccine was fast, they have used rna technology that took about 30 years to work effectively.	itt_134	Even though the development of the vaccine was fast, they have used RNA technology that took about 30 years to work effectively.	con
most vaccines have side effects such as headaches and muscle aches so it is the same with eh covid vaccines.	itt_135	Most vaccines have side effects such as headaches and muscle aches so it is the same with eh COVID vaccines.	con
the fast development was due to china sharing the covid shape to the world so that it would reduce the time to research.	itt_136	The fast development was due to China sharing the COVID shape to the world so that it would reduce the time to research.	con
there are natural ways to help boost the immune system and fight the virus instead of putting artificial substances into the body.	itt_137	There are natural ways to help boost the immune system and fight the virus instead of putting artificial substances into the body.	con
it doesn't stop the spread just how much it impacts so young people wouldn't need it as much	itt_138	It doesn't stop the spread just how much it impacts so young people wouldn't need it as much	con
professionals on tv have said it won't protect you from getting the virus or stop you spreading it to others	itt_139	Professionals on tv have said it won't protect you from getting the virus or stop you spreading it to others	con
aby possible long term effects are still not apparent, those trialling the vaccine are monitored for 2 years to keep an eye out for anything untoward occurring.	itt_140	Aby possible long term effects are still not apparent, those trialling the vaccine are monitored for 2 years to keep an eye out for anything untoward occurring.	con
the vaccines that use mrna and involve genetically modified primates are a new technique, compared to vaccines that use weakened or deactivated pathogens.	itt_141	The vaccines that use mRNA and involve genetically modified primates are a new technique, compared to vaccines that use weakened or deactivated pathogens.	con
covid-19 has an extraordinarily low mortality rate in healthy young people, so it is not worth taking the vaccine unless one is elderly or has conditions such as an autoimmune disease.	itt_142	COVID-19 has an extraordinarily low mortality rate in healthy young people, so it is not worth taking the vaccine unless one is elderly or has conditions such as an autoimmune disease.	con
they just don't want it because they don't agrees with it or they have a phobia of needles	itt_143	They just don't want it because they don't agrees with it or they have a phobia of needles	con
according to scientific research, it is safer to take the vaccine as opposed to catching the virus and dying.	itt_144	According to scientific research, it is safer to take the vaccine as opposed to catching the virus and dying.	con
even though the vaccine was rushed, they had many more test subjects and data that enabled this vaccine to make it through to the approval processes.	itt_145	Even though the vaccine was rushed, they had many more test subjects and data that enabled this vaccine to make it through to the approval processes.	con
1)there have been more deaths from adverse reactions to vaccines from this vaccine than any others within the last 20 years	itt_146	1)there have been more deaths from adverse reactions to vaccines from this vaccine than any others within the last 20 years	con
the vaccines are new and haven't been tested for long enough to know the long term side-effects.	itt_147	The vaccines are new and haven't been tested for long enough to know the long term side-effects.	con
they do not want to put foreign substances into their body and would rather rely on building their immune system naturally.	itt_148	They do not want to put foreign substances into their body and would rather rely on building their immune system naturally.	con
they do not trust the pharmaceutical companies producing the vaccines, nor the government, who are pushing them.	itt_149	They do not trust the pharmaceutical companies producing the vaccines, nor the government, who are pushing them.	con
they are still undergoing clinical trials and given the side effects and deaths from these vaccines to date these trials should have been stopped months ago	itt_150	They are still undergoing clinical trials and given the side effects and deaths from these vaccines to date these trials should have been stopped months ago	con
the vaccine hasn't been tested for the number of years required to know for certain whether it will cause serious side effects in the future	itt_151	the vaccine hasn't been tested for the number of years required to know for certain whether it will cause serious side effects in the future	con
worried about long-term effects. or the danger to health from having to be injected year after year..for very little shown benefit	itt_152	Worried about long-term effects. Or the danger to health from having to be injected year after year..for very little shown benefit	con
the cost and upkeep getting absolutely everyone vaccinated,would be better to get at risk groups done. has been months since rollout yet less than half have the uk have been vaccinated fully.	itt_153	The cost and upkeep getting absolutely everyone vaccinated,would be better to get at risk groups done. Has been months since rollout yet less than half have the UK have been vaccinated fully.	con
the vaccine does not prevent you from getting covid or from transferring covid so the vaccine is ineffective	itt_154	The vaccine does not prevent you from getting covid or from transferring covid so the vaccine is ineffective	con
the long term side effects from the vaccine aren't known yet as this has not had the length of time for testing as other vaccines	itt_155	The long term side effects from the vaccine aren't known yet as this has not had the length of time for testing as other vaccines	con
because they aren't in a high risk category and kobe a healthy lifestyle ie eat well, exercise, don't smoke or drink. and therefore have a good immune system	itt_156	Because they aren't in a high risk category and kobe a healthy lifestyle ie eat well, exercise, don't smoke or drink. And therefore have a good immune system	con
the vaccines are still within their trial periods with the animal testing stages skipped as they were so disastrous.	itt_157	The vaccines are still within their trial periods with the animal testing stages skipped as they were so disastrous.	con
if healthy people don't wanted the vaccine, let them catch 'covid', recover, and then they'll be naturally immune. my body, my choice.	itt_158	If healthy people don't wanted the vaccine, let them catch 'Covid', recover, and then they'll be naturally immune. My body, my choice.	con
they have heard and seen conspiracy theories about the vaccine, how it isn't beneficial to you, there hasn't been any scientific fact about it, how people in authority want you to get it to control u	itt_159	They have heard and seen conspiracy theories about the vaccine, how it isn't beneficial to you, there hasn't been any scientific fact about it, how people in authority want you to get it to control u	con
because the virus started in china, the chinese government could use the vaccine as an agenda to control the world	itt_160	Because the virus started in China, the Chinese government could use the vaccine as an agenda to control the world	con
nobody knows what is truly inside the vaccine and they could be inserting tiny microchips inside the vaccine to have control over you	itt_161	Nobody knows what is truly inside the vaccine and they could be inserting tiny microchips inside the vaccine to have control over you	con
the vaccine is only temporary (lasts for 12 months) and doesn't prevent you from contracting the virus anyway, only lessens the effects.	itt_162	The vaccine is only temporary (lasts for 12 months) and doesn't prevent you from contracting the virus anyway, only lessens the effects.	con
the vaccines available do not stop you from getting or transmitting the virus. people have a right to determine their own willingness to bear risk of a vaccine that may not benefit you or anyone else.	itt_163	The vaccines available do not stop you from getting or transmitting the virus. People have a right to determine their own willingness to bear risk of a vaccine that may not benefit you or anyone else.	con
it is generally considered unethical to test treatments (etc) on pregnant women so it is genuinely suspect that now in this case the vaccine is is being said to be absolutely safe for pregant women	itt_164	It is generally considered unethical to test treatments (etc) on pregnant women so it is genuinely suspect that now in this case the vaccine is is being said to be absolutely safe for pregant women	con
the vaccine hasn't been around long enough for a human baby to gestate fully and therefore unequivocally state that there are no long term detrimental side effects	itt_165	The vaccine hasn't been around long enough for a human baby to gestate fully and therefore unequivocally state that there are no long term detrimental side effects	con
there is a history of medical interventions being touted as safe enough, found to have been erroniously pushed upon the pubic, causing serious long term problems with lawsuits filed and scandal abound	itt_166	There is a history of medical interventions being touted as safe enough, found to have been erroniously pushed upon the pubic, causing serious long term problems with lawsuits filed and scandal abound	con
over 99% recover, covid is harmless to all but the sickest of people. why do we all need to take a vaccine?why don't the media tell us the vaccine is a rna messenger?	itt_167	Over 99% recover, Covid is harmless to all but the sickest of people. Why do we all need to take a vaccine?Why don't the media tell us the vaccine is a RNA messenger?	con
they might not trust the government who is actively pushing for people to have the vaccine.	itt_168	They might not trust the government who is actively pushing for people to have the vaccine.	con
it is dangerous there have been many deaths and awful side effects suffered by many who have received these so called vaccines . look at yellow card reports & do research. listen to dr mike yeadon	itt_169	it is dangerous there have been many deaths and awful side effects suffered by many who have received these so called vaccines . look at yellow card reports & do research. Listen to Dr Mike Yeadon	con
the virus has neve been isolated. it has an extremely high recovery rate. your immune system will do a better job & it is more important to keep it strong with vitamin d3, vit c exercise & fresh air	itt_170	the virus has neve been isolated. It has an extremely high recovery rate. Your immune system will do a better job & it is more important to keep it strong with Vitamin D3, Vit C exercise & fresh air	con
ivermectin has had better results in clearing covid from people within 5 days of treatment. it was used in india up until the vaccine was available and had better results than the vaccine.	itt_171	Ivermectin has had better results in clearing covid from people within 5 days of treatment. It was used in India up until the vaccine was available and had better results than the vaccine.	con
the killer virus speeches by the prime minister, boris, contradict everything week on week. is it a killer virus or not. pharma companies would give you vaccines to make money even untested ones.	itt_172	The killer virus speeches by the Prime Minister, Boris, contradict everything week on week. Is it a killer virus or not. Pharma companies would give you vaccines to make money even untested ones.	con
too many intelligent people like doctors and professors are speaking out against the vaccine because it's dangerous and untested. who are we supposed to believe. untested vaccines and now boosters too	itt_173	Too many intelligent people like doctors and professors are speaking out against the vaccine because it's dangerous and untested. Who are we supposed to believe. Untested vaccines and now boosters too	con
there are too many potential serioud side effects and some people have died after taking the vaccine	itt_174	There are too many potential serioud side effects and some people have died after taking the vaccine	con
there are more natural ways such as an altered diet to combat covid-19 rather than take the vaccine	itt_175	There are more natural ways such as an altered diet to combat Covid-19 rather than take the vaccine	con
ive had covid and survived without vaccine. had other treatment ivermectin. studies have shown body develops a good strong immunity having survived the symptoms	itt_176	Ive had covid and survived without vaccine. Had other treatment ivermectin. Studies have shown body develops a good strong immunity having survived the symptoms	con
if covid has been around for decades why does your info say it has only existed since 2020? confusing statments like this make me more reluctant. % dead globally is still less than 1.	itt_177	If Covid has been around for decades why does your info say it has only existed since 2020? Confusing statments like this make me more reluctant. % dead globally is still less than 1.	con
how is it possible that there is a vaccine for covid which has only been around for over a year, but there isnt a cure/ vaccine for cancer despite all the money people raise to ''find a cure''	itt_178	How is it possible that there is a vaccine for Covid which has only been around for over a year, but there isnt a cure/ vaccine for cancer despite ALL the money people raise to ''find a cure''	con
the vaccine is unnecessary and the long term effect unknown at this stage. especially if they are healthy and under 70, the risk to them is so small as to be not worth it.	itt_179	The vaccine is unnecessary and the long term effect unknown at this stage. Especially if they are healthy and under 70, the risk to them is so small as to be not worth it.	con
rejecting the vaccine is the only way to object to the human rights abuse that is the official response to the covid -19 incident. trust in institutions is so low, this is the only choice they've had.	itt_180	Rejecting the vaccine is the only way to object to the human rights abuse that is the official response to the Covid -19 incident. Trust in institutions is so low, this is the only choice they've had.	con
they do not need the vaccine as they are young and not at as much risk of developing serious complications	itt_181	They do not need the vaccine as they are young and not at as much risk of developing serious complications	con
that we don't need the vaccine when the survival rate is extremely high, and that most people have no symptoms or only mild symptoms.	itt_182	That we don't need the vaccine when the survival rate is extremely high, and that most people have no symptoms or only mild symptoms.	con
that they don't trust the government or the "powers that be" and that they don't trust what will be injected in to them. classic conspiracy theory that the vaccine is a way to microchip us etc.	itt_183	That they don't trust the government or the "powers that be" and that they don't trust what will be injected in to them. Classic conspiracy theory that the vaccine is a way to microchip us etc.	con
that the don't want the vaccine beacuse of various cases of the side effects and could argue that these could be worse than covid itself. the list of possible side effects is quite extensive.	itt_184	That the don't want the Vaccine beacuse of various cases of the side effects and could argue that these could be worse than covid itself. The list of possible side effects is quite extensive.	con
the risk of blood clotting - it may be low but the risk of catching serious covid-19 is just as low	itt_185	The risk of blood clotting - it may be low but the risk of catching serious covid-19 is just as low	con
the turnaround for approval was extremely quick (even if scientific technologies have advanced) suggesting the process may have been rushed	itt_186	The turnaround for approval was extremely quick (even if scientific technologies have advanced) suggesting the process may have been rushed	con
they have a good immune system that works very well, and injecting an experimental drug into their system that doesn't even guarantee that they will be protected from covid 19 is stupid.	itt_187	They have a good immune system that works very well, and injecting an experimental drug into their system that doesn't even guarantee that they will be protected from Covid 19 is stupid.	con
many, many doctors and scientists have spoken out and said these things are not safe. there's not any long term data on the damage this can be causing.	itt_188	Many, many Doctors and scientists have spoken out and said these things are not safe. There's not any long term data on the damage this can be causing.	con
none of the jabs have been approved. only authorised for emergency use. it is supposed to be voluntary because it's a large scale experiment.	itt_189	None of the jabs have been APPROVED. Only AUTHORISED for EMERGENCY use. It is supposed to be VOLUNTARY because it's a large scale EXPERIMENT.	con
my wife had the vaccine and now she is blind in one eye and going blind in the other eye.  and they can't do anything about it.	itt_190	My wife had the vaccine and now she is blind in one eye and going blind in the other eye.  And they can't do anything about it.	con
if they got the virus, it wouldn't be bad because they are healthy enough to survive it. no point in having the vaccine	itt_191	If they got the virus, it wouldn't be bad because they are healthy enough to survive it. No point in having the vaccine	con
they have been produced quicker than any other vaccine and haven't been proven long term yet.	itt_192	They have been produced quicker than any other vaccine and haven't been proven long term yet.	con
what happened all them years, when woman gave birth to babies with missing limbs, not enough information and feel uneasy	itt_193	What happened all them years, when woman gave birth to babies with missing limbs, not enough information and feel uneasy	con
they do not trust the rate of how fast the vaccine was made...why do they need to take it if they already had covid or could still get it...	itt_194	They do not trust the rate of how fast the vaccine was made...Why do they need to take it if they already had covid or could still get it...	con
why do we really need to vaccine so much of the population when there endless of reports and professionals who clearly states that it mainly affects a specific group	itt_195	Why do we really need to vaccine so much of the population when there endless of reports and professionals who clearly states that it mainly affects a specific group	con
the government and the people behind the government.. ie bill gates... their agenda! they real agenda... sterilisation, depopulation,  the media... not hearing all of the truth.. so much untold storie	itt_196	The government and the people behind the government.. ie Bill Gates... Their agenda! They real agenda... Sterilisation, depopulation,  the media... Not hearing all of the truth.. So much untold storie	con
they havent been tested enough as it only took a few months for them to distribute it	itt_197	they havent been tested enough as it only took a few months for them to distribute it	con
it is vague when a positive treatment injection comes on the market quickly. the approval is too fast	itt_198	It is vague when a positive treatment injection comes on the market quickly. the approval is too fast	con
the companies responsible for these vaccines have been involved in deaths and seemingly intentional sterilization previously	itt_199	The companies responsible for these vaccines have been involved in deaths and seemingly intentional sterilization previously	con
that they will not receive the vaccine based on not enough data on what the long term effects of the vaccine may be.	itt_200	That they will not receive the vaccine based on not enough data on what the long term effects of the vaccine may be.	con
that the vaccines have not been through the correct clinical trial process and is therefore unsafe.	itt_201	That the vaccines have not been through the correct clinical trial process and is therefore unsafe.	con
the uk's chief scientific officer has a î£600,000 investment in pfizer, which he never publicly declared; this is surely a conflict of interest.	itt_202	The UK's Chief Scientific Officer has a Î£600,000 investment in Pfizer, which he never publicly declared; this is surely a conflict of interest.	con
politicians and the nhs' management have historically lied to their own people for generations; why the sudden inclination to believe that they are competent and/or trustworthy now?	itt_203	Politicians and the NHS' management have historically lied to their own people for generations; why the sudden inclination to believe that they are competent and/or trustworthy now?	con
the uk mandated that deaths within 28 days of a +ve test are covid-related on death certificates; you're intelligent mr stafford, so surely you know the difference between dying with and of something.	itt_204	The UK mandated that deaths within 28 days of a +ve test are COVID-related on death certificates; you're intelligent Mr Stafford, so surely you know the difference between dying with and of something.	con
it will be used to introduce a medical apartheid and a social credit system that favours the state, just like china.	itt_205	It will be used to introduce a medical apartheid and a social credit system that favours the state, just like China.	con
there are other highly effective treatments which negate the need for these treatments such as ivermectin. hydroxychloroquin, vitamin d3, zinc and quercitin.	itt_206	there are other highly effective treatments which negate the need for these treatments such as Ivermectin. Hydroxychloroquin, vitamin D3, Zinc and quercitin.	con
it has been rushed through and so we are not sure of the long-term effects - it is impossible to be sure in such as short space of time!	itt_207	It has been rushed through and so we are not sure of the long-term effects - it is impossible to be sure in such as short space of time!	con
the vaccine has been rushed into production due to the pandemic, we don't know the long-term side-effects of the vaccine.	itt_208	The vaccine has been rushed into production due to the pandemic, we don't know the long-term side-effects of the vaccine.	con
there have been recorded cases of people dying from blood clots after taking the vaccine, others have been seriously ill with side-effects.	itt_209	There have been recorded cases of people dying from blood clots after taking the vaccine, others have been seriously ill with side-effects.	con
people haven't been screened to see if they have an existing unknown illness before receiving the vaccination, the vaccine may make people experience worse side-effects in that case.	itt_210	People haven't been screened to see if they have an existing unknown illness before receiving the vaccination, the vaccine may make people experience worse side-effects in that case.	con
worried about the government mixing and matching vaccines, using them not as instructed and declaring boosters will be needed to fight new variants as well as flu vaccine - excessive drugs in system	itt_211	Worried about the government mixing and matching vaccines, using them not as instructed and declaring boosters will be needed to fight new variants as well as flu vaccine - excessive drugs in system	con
they do not trust the reason for getting it, a virus so deadly that you need to be tested to even know if you have it, and with such a low mortality rate.	itt_212	They do not trust the reason for getting it, a virus so deadly that you need to be tested to even know if you have it, and with such a low mortality rate.	con
you cannot sue the vaccine company if anything goes wrong, pfizer has been sued in the past for a lot of money, billions...	itt_213	you cannot sue the vaccine company if anything goes wrong, Pfizer has been sued in the past for A LOT of money, billions...	con
they don't trust the information they are being given because of the confusion the media has caused.	itt_214	They don't trust the information they are being given because of the confusion the media has caused.	con
do not think that there has been enough time passed to see the possible long term negative effects.	itt_215	Do not think that there has been enough time passed to see the possible long term negative effects.	con
it was something that was required all over the world, that huge amount of pressure can make room for human error in the process.	itt_216	It was something that was required all over the world, that huge amount of pressure can make room for human error in the process.	con
nobody knows the long term effects of having the vaccine - eg fertility in younger people, cancer etc.	itt_217	Nobody knows the long term effects of having the vaccine - eg fertility in younger people, cancer etc.	con
no one knows what the long term health implications of taking them might be. there is probably a lot we don't yet know about them.	itt_218	No one knows what the long term health implications of taking them might be. There is probably a lot we don't yet know about them.	con
they do not feel that they need the vaccine as they believe themselves to be fit and healthy.	itt_219	They do not feel that they need the vaccine as they believe themselves to be fit and healthy.	con
people might not want it due to the way our leaders and papers seem to be telling diffrent storys every day	itt_220	people might not want it due to the way our leaders and papers seem to be telling diffrent storys every day	con
claims that the vaccine is 100% safe and effective is inherently dishonest due to the lack of long term safety studies	itt_221	Claims that the vaccine is 100% safe and effective is inherently dishonest due to the lack of long term safety studies	con
it is illogical to vaccinate people who are not at risk of a disease. in this case, the benefits of vaccination do not outweigh the risks.	itt_222	It is illogical to vaccinate people who are not at risk of a disease. In this case, the benefits of vaccination do not outweigh the risks.	con
not enough time to create a new vaccine, there have been illnesses around for years and years and a cure or vaccine has not yet been found	itt_223	Not enough time to create a new vaccine, there have been illnesses around for years and years and a cure or vaccine has not yet been found	con
dangerous, not been tested for long enough periods, the testing is being done now over the next 2 years	itt_224	Dangerous, not been tested for long enough periods, The testing is being done now over the next 2 years	con
once its injected in your body you then cannot change your mind and have it removed	itt_225	Once its injected in your body you then cannot change your mind and have it removed	con
they don't trust that it's not a government ploy to control the masses e.g. now we cannot travel unless we are vaccinated and if we do we have to pay î£100-î£250 for tests.	itt_226	They don't trust that it's not a government ploy to control the masses e.g. now we cannot travel unless we are vaccinated and if we do we have to pay Î£100-Î£250 for tests.	con
they do not want to receive the jab because the long known implications/side effects (if any) of the jab are unknown.	itt_227	They do not want to receive the jab because the long known implications/side effects (if any) of the jab are unknown.	con
they have already had covid-19 and did not suffer with it to any major extent at all and had no long term effects on their health.	itt_228	They have already had COVID-19 and did not suffer with it to any major extent at all and had no long term effects on their health.	con
this person could say they are concerned there has not been enough time to of produced a trusted vaccine so quickly.	itt_229	This person could say they are concerned there has not been enough time to of produced a trusted vaccine so quickly.	con
they could say there could be a risk with the side effects of the vaccine - both common and reported rare side effects.	itt_230	They could say there could be a risk with the side effects of the vaccine - both common and reported rare side effects.	con
they could be confused by the amount of different vaccines and overwhelmed with the different arguments for and against and be doubtful.	itt_231	They could be confused by the amount of different vaccines and overwhelmed with the different arguments for and against and be doubtful.	con
serious side effects unknown as vaccine trialled to quickly as shown with the astra zenica/oxford vaccine. serious side effects now coming to light.	itt_232	Serious side effects unknown as vaccine trialled to quickly as shown with the Astra Zenica/Oxford vaccine. Serious side effects now coming to light.	con
it is not known how effective these vaccines are, a lot of people assume they will be immune to covid-19 once vaccinated.	itt_233	It is not known how effective these vaccines are, a lot of people assume they will be immune to Covid-19 once vaccinated.	con
how can a cute be developed so quickly - we can't cure many other diseases that have been around for years!!	itt_234	How can a cute be developed so quickly - we can't cure many other diseases that have been around for years!!	con
because of the risk of serious side effects and long term health problems such as infertility	itt_235	Because of the risk of serious side effects and long term health problems such as infertility	con
that the so called vaccine is actually not a traditional vaccine and is a new technology.	itt_236	That the so called vaccine is actually not a traditional vaccine and is a new technology.	con
side effects worse than the disease, too much risk. see yellow card reporting for all reported side effects.	itt_237	Side effects worse than the disease, too much risk. See Yellow card reporting for all reported side effects.	con
my chances of catching covid and dying are less than a- having adverse reactions and b- dying as an indirect result of the vaccine.	itt_238	My chances of catching Covid and dying are less than A- having adverse reactions and B- dying as an indirect result of the vaccine.	con
protection from these vaccines are temporary, sometimes only providing protection for a few months. antibody tests with several colleagues after both jabs have shown most don't have antibodies.	itt_239	Protection from these vaccines are temporary, sometimes only providing protection for a few months. Antibody tests with several colleagues after BOTH jabs have shown most don't have antibodies.	con
previous attempts at producing safe coronavirus vaccines have failed spectacularly, resulting in animal deaths in trials.	itt_240	Previous attempts at producing safe coronavirus vaccines have failed spectacularly, resulting in animal deaths in trials.	con
it isn't a vaccine! read the pils. all say no reduction in transmission or infection, hospitalisations, severe illness, deaths, only that they may reduce symptoms of mild-mod illness.	itt_241	IT ISN'T A VACCINE! Read the PILs. All say NO reduction in transmission or infection, hospitalisations, severe illness, deaths, only that they MAY reduce symptoms of mild-mod illness.	con
there certainly are other treatments. e.g.,  hydroxychlorquine at the correct dose (study outcome dependent on dose, easy to falsify efficacy via low dosing), ivermectin, zinc.	itt_242	There certainly ARE other treatments. E.g.,  Hydroxychlorquine at the correct dose (study outcome dependent on dose, easy to falsify efficacy via low dosing), Ivermectin, zinc.	con
we do not have a clear reading of the sides effects whether being immediate or long term.	itt_243	we do not have a clear reading of the sides effects whether being immediate or long term.	con
it is their choice and their body and they choose not to have the vaccine then there is nothing anyone can do as it is not mandated yet!	itt_244	It is their choice and their body and they choose not to have the vaccine then there is nothing anyone can do as it is not mandated yet!	con
the vaccine trial was on a small group. the millions being tested now are guinea pigs, so people are dying and getting serious side effects that can't be reversed. and they can't sue for damages.	itt_245	The vaccine trial was on a small group. The millions being tested now are guinea pigs, so people are dying and getting serious side effects that can't be reversed. And they can't sue for damages.	con
the vaccine deaths aren't being accurately registered, so the death toll is higher than it seems. side effects aren't being accurately credited to the vaccine, so side effects aren't being registered.	itt_246	The vaccine deaths aren't being accurately registered, so the death toll is higher than it seems. Side effects aren't being accurately credited to the vaccine, so side effects aren't being registered.	con
side effects based on people's accounts include death, severe period changes, strokes, clots, ms, dementia, dizziness, weakness, migraines, miscarriages, hearing loss, blindness, tinnitus, and pain.	itt_247	Side effects based on people's accounts include death, severe period changes, strokes, clots, MS, dementia, dizziness, weakness, migraines, miscarriages, hearing loss, blindness, tinnitus, and pain.	con
there is a substantial risk that some people with respiratory or heart ailments will have severe reactions to either the vaccine or subsequent infections.	itt_248	There is a substantial risk that some people with respiratory or heart ailments will have severe reactions to either the vaccine or subsequent infections.	con
fear of the unknown. such as what repercussions this vaccine will have in future years etc.	itt_249	Fear of the unknown. Such as what repercussions this vaccine will have in future years etc.	con
as they are young and otherwise healthy, the risk posed by covid-19 is very low. the side effects of the vaccine may be equally or more dangerous.	itt_250	As they are young and otherwise healthy, the risk posed by Covid-19 is very low. The side effects of the vaccine may be equally or more dangerous.	con
these vaccines use mrna technology which is unprecedented in the field of vaccinations, and as such our knowledge regarding the long-term consequences of these vaccinations is dubious or lacking.	itt_251	These vaccines use mRNA technology which is unprecedented in the field of vaccinations, and as such our knowledge regarding the long-term consequences of these vaccinations is dubious or lacking.	con
the companies producing these vaccines have had scandals in the past resulting from unethical behaviour and thus cannot be trusted going forward, particularly with something as serious as a vaccine.	itt_252	The companies producing these vaccines have had scandals in the past resulting from unethical behaviour and thus cannot be trusted going forward, particularly with something as serious as a vaccine.	con
they would like to wait a few years before having a covid vaccination as they do not feel like we have enough evidence about the long term effects.	itt_253	They would like to wait a few years before having a covid vaccination as they do not feel like we have enough evidence about the long term effects.	con
the long term effects are not currently known as they have not had time to gather sufficient data.	itt_254	The long term effects are not currently known as they have not had time to gather sufficient data.	con
liability for any negative reaction to having the vaccines have been wavied for the manufacturers of the vaccines.	itt_255	Liability for any negative reaction to having the vaccines have been wavied for the manufacturers of the vaccines.	con
the studies have not been on big enough groups regarding side effects. there are alot of unknown effects people are experiencing	itt_256	The studies have not been on big enough groups regarding side effects. There are alot of unknown effects people are experiencing	con
the vaccines have been tested on animals. the information put out to the public is very selective	itt_257	The vaccines have been tested on animals. The information put out to the public is very selective	con
the government are not administering the vaccines in the exact way they were given in the tests so this will effect their outcome	itt_258	The government are not administering the vaccines in the exact way they were given in the tests so this will effect their outcome	con
they are worried because they are higher risk and having the vaccine could take ill effect	itt_259	They are worried because they are higher risk and having the vaccine could take ill effect	con
we have had cancer, hiv and even the common cold but not vaccine has been produced for these. even though these have been around for decades. how can something that feels rushed, be trusted?	itt_260	We have had cancer, HIV and even the common cold but not vaccine has been produced for these. Even though these have been around for decades. How can something that feels rushed, be trusted?	con
they do not trust the vaccine and the companies behind them. pfizer does not have the best track record.	itt_261	They do not trust the vaccine and the companies behind them. Pfizer does not have the best track record.	con
not enough time to test it there are any complications from the vaccines that can harm people that take it	itt_262	Not enough time to test it there are any complications from the vaccines that can harm people that take it	con
the government are trying to control - we have never been forced into having any other vaccine so why this one?	itt_263	The government are trying to control - we have never been forced into having any other vaccine so why this one?	con
there are stats for how many deaths within 28 days of having covid  but no stats at all of deaths 28 days after having any of the vaccines	itt_264	There are stats for how many deaths within 28 days of having covid  but no stats at all of deaths 28 days after having any of the vaccines	con
there have been articles saying that the vaccine causes infertility. there is no long term testing so we don't know if there will be more issues later down the line.	itt_265	There have been articles saying that the vaccine causes infertility. There is no long term testing so we don't know if there will be more issues later down the line.	con
although rare, vaccines can trigger certain illnesses such as m.e/cfs and pots so its too risky.	itt_266	Although rare, vaccines can trigger certain illnesses such as M.E/CFS and POTS so its too risky.	con
because there is no proof for the covid pandemic so why would you get a vaccine for a pandemic with no proof	itt_267	Because there is no proof for the covid pandemic so why would you get a vaccine for a pandemic with no proof	con
because the government has always acted against the interest of the people and this is exactly the same scenario as always, poisoning us, making us infertile for their great plan. the great reset	itt_268	Because the government has always acted against the interest of the people and this is exactly the same scenario as always, poisoning us, making us infertile for their great plan. The great reset	con
you can't vaccinate against the common cold and the corona virus is of the same family, so how can it work.	itt_269	You can't vaccinate against the common cold and the corona virus is of the same family, so how can it work.	con
they do not think there has been sufficient time to develop the vaccine and know it's true negative long term impacts	itt_270	They do not think there has been sufficient time to develop the vaccine and know it's true negative long term impacts	con
it is only allowed to be issued because of being an "emergency" even though the covid pabdemic was downgraded back in 2020. it is still in trials until 2023.	itt_271	It is only allowed to be issued because of being an "emergency" even though the covid pabdemic was downgraded back in 2020. It is still in trials until 2023.	con
it is not safe, it hasnt been tested and used long enough to review and improve	itt_272	It is not safe, it hasnt been tested and used long enough to review and improve	con
you ever seen that video where bill gates says by using health care, vaccines, and birth control, we can lower the world's population? not for me. kthnxbye.	itt_273	You ever seen that video where Bill Gates says by using health care, vaccines, and birth control, we can lower the world's population? Not for me. KTHNXBYE.	con
trials for the vaccine don't finish until 2023, you are taking an experimental vaccine for something that is 99.+% recoverable rate.	itt_274	Trials for the vaccine don't finish until 2023, you are taking an experimental vaccine for something that is 99.+% recoverable rate.	con
even if the person is fully vaccinated they still can't meet up with someone who is not which, don't make sense because the vaccine meant to make you immune	itt_275	even if the person is fully vaccinated they still can't meet up with someone who is not which, don't make sense because the vaccine meant to make you immune	con
my chance as a healthy person of catching and having a problem with covid is miniscule and probably less than the chance of me suffereing an adverse reaction to the vaccine	itt_276	My chance as a healthy person of catching and having a problem with Covid is miniscule and probably less than the chance of me suffereing an adverse reaction to the vaccine	con
why when we have a so called 'global pandemic' do doctors, scientists, pharmaceutical industries not get together for the common good, for humanity, no, it is all about the money, disgusting	itt_277	Why when we have a so called 'global pandemic' do doctors, scientists, pharmaceutical industries NOT get together for the common good, for humanity, no, it is all about the money, disgusting	con
the vaccine doesn't prevent you from catching the disease. saying everyone has a duty to get it to protect others just doesn't make any sense.	itt_278	The vaccine doesn't prevent you from catching the disease. Saying everyone has a duty to get it to protect others just doesn't make any sense.	con
covid is a planned pandemic intended to scare people into getting a vaccine and thereby control them	itt_279	Covid is a planned pandemic intended to scare people into getting a vaccine and thereby control them	con
agendas coming into play like political and also money. for example the british government has considered going against medical advise and increasing the time between the 1st and 2nd dose.	itt_280	Agendas coming into play like political and also money. For example the British government has considered going against medical advise and increasing the time between the 1st and 2nd dose.	con
not allowing for free speech and open discussion. banning any soical media that even questions vaccines and possible side effects are taken down.	itt_281	Not allowing for free speech and open discussion. Banning any soical media that even questions vaccines and possible side effects are taken down.	con
they have been unable to find any peer reviewed papers on the vaccine, only glorified press-releases where evidence of selective information presentation was already noticeable	itt_282	They have been unable to find any peer reviewed papers on the vaccine, only glorified press-releases where evidence of selective information presentation was already noticeable	con
the vaccine is unlike any other vaccine it has messenger dna. the long term effects have not been proven	itt_283	The vaccine is unlike any other vaccine it has messenger DNA. The long term effects have not been proven	con
they might tell you the vaccine was rushed and there is no way it can be safe being created so quickly.	itt_284	They might tell you the vaccine was rushed and there is no way it can be safe being created so quickly.	con
they might tell you that the government is planning something and the vaccine is all fake.	itt_285	They might tell you that the government is planning something and the vaccine is all fake.	con
they might tell you that they don't need the vaccine as the survival rate for covid 19 is so high.	itt_286	They might tell you that they don't need the vaccine as the survival rate for covid 19 is so high.	con
many many people are dying and suffering terrible adverse reactions in the us and uk via vaers and yellow card.	itt_287	Many many people are dying and suffering terrible adverse reactions in the US and UK via Vaers and yellow card.	con
risk of cytokine storm and also all studies useless as didn't include many elderly, pregnant women or those with ill health.	itt_288	Risk of cytokine storm and also all studies useless as didn't include many elderly, pregnant women or those with ill health.	con
the vaccine is unneccesary for young people who are not at risk of getting seriously ill from covid	itt_289	the vaccine is unneccesary for young people who are not at risk of getting seriously ill from covid	con
it is dangerous to have the vaccine as it has not undergone years of testing so we are unaware of possible future side effects	itt_290	it is dangerous to have the vaccine as it has not undergone years of testing so we are unaware of possible future side effects	con
vaccination is a choice and whilst it is a choice every individual has the right to refuse it.	itt_291	Vaccination is a choice and whilst it is a choice every individual has the right to refuse it.	con
there are too many options for vaccines and not sure which one is the best/most appropriate.	itt_292	There are too many options for vaccines and not sure which one is the best/most appropriate.	con
the media is lying and only shows so much, the deaths relating to the vaccines aren't broadcasted	itt_293	The media is lying and only shows so much, the deaths relating to the vaccines aren't broadcasted	con
we don't know enough about a brand new disease to suddenly be able to vaccinate it yet still we some how to manage to spend and raise millions on cancer research and still have gotten nowhere.	itt_294	we don't know enough about a brand new disease to suddenly be able to vaccinate it yet still we some how to manage to spend and raise millions on cancer research and still have gotten nowhere.	con
there are too many variants of the covid virus and too many mutations so does the vaccine even work.	itt_295	There are too many variants of the Covid virus and too many mutations so does the vaccine even work.	con
don't trust the government, who makes the vaccine or pharmaceutical companies. don't think that covid is real	itt_296	Don't trust the government, who makes the vaccine or pharmaceutical companies. Don't think that covid is real	con
its all to new, we do not know much about it or if we can trust the people doing it.	itt_297	Its all to new, we do not know much about it or if we can trust the people doing it.	con
getting the vaccine has become too politicised and they dont trust those who have been pushing it	itt_298	Getting the vaccine has become too politicised and they dont trust those who have been pushing it	con
the misinformation from scientists since march of 2020 has been very confusing. for example dr fauci changing his position on what is and isnt safe every month.	itt_299	The misinformation from scientists since march of 2020 has been very confusing. For example dr fauci changing his position on what is and isnt safe every month.	con
the likelyhood of dying from the virus in those who are young and healthy is so minimal it isnt worth them taking the vaccine until we have more long term data	itt_300	The likelyhood of dying from the virus in those who are young and healthy is so minimal it isnt worth them taking the vaccine until we have more long term data	con
the vaccines are still in a trial phase, it should not be expected from members of the public to participate in a vaccine trial.	itt_301	The vaccines are still in a trial phase, it should not be expected from members of the public to participate in a vaccine trial.	con
we don't know the long term side effects, especially for pregnant people or those trying for a baby	itt_302	We don't know the long term side effects, especially for pregnant people or those trying for a baby	con
it might make my health worse in the future as there is no scientific evidence of the effects long term.	itt_303	It might make my health worse in the future as there is no scientific evidence of the effects long term.	con
it's still too new and we do not know how it will impact our health in the future	itt_304	It's still too new and we do not know how it will impact our health in the future	con
the vaccine is being funded by bill gates so he can have full control of the world population	itt_305	The vaccine is being funded by Bill Gates so he can have full control of the world population	con
pcr test gives bogus results when magnified beyond 20 cycles. average cycles of 2020 were 45 until january 2021 when who (quietly) told scientists to lower the cycle threshold.	itt_306	PCR test gives bogus results when magnified beyond 20 cycles. Average cycles of 2020 were 45 until January 2021 when WHO (quietly) told scientists to lower the cycle threshold.	con
look at county burial and cremation stats from 2020 you will see that on average more people died in 2017	itt_307	Look at county burial and cremation stats from 2020 you will see that on average more people died in 2017	con
old people were murdered from march last year when they were taken out of hospitals and put into care homes. they had dnr notices slapped on them and left to die with no famiily to hold their hand.	itt_308	Old people were murdered from March last year when they were taken out of hospitals and put into care homes. They had DNR notices slapped on them and left to die with no famiily to hold their hand.	con
the long-term side effects are unknown and the vaccine was rushed. various companies have released their own vaccine and many of them has made a considerably amount of money.	itt_309	The long-term side effects are unknown and the vaccine was rushed. Various companies have released their own vaccine and many of them has made a considerably amount of money.	con
every year people get the flu but for some reason nobody caught flu this year. if this virus truly existed then every person on planet earth would be queuing up for the vaccine	itt_310	Every year people get the flu but for some reason nobody caught flu this year. If this virus truly existed then every person on planet earth would be queuing up for the vaccine	con
it is going to mess with their immune system or the diea of letting a foreign substance into their body feels uneasy.	itt_311	It is going to mess with their immune system or the diea of letting a foreign substance into their body feels uneasy.	con
this is governments way of controlling the population. or the have nano chips inside the vaccines that are used to track the public.	itt_312	This is governments way of controlling the population. Or the have nano chips inside the vaccines that are used to track the public.	con
it won't cover all variants and you're injecting my body with chemicals that might not work	itt_313	It won't cover all variants and you're injecting my body with chemicals that might not work	con
the makers of the vaccination have made them too quick and have do not have enough evidence so we might die	itt_314	The makers of the vaccination have made them too quick and have do not have enough evidence so we might die	con
have to be be vaccinnated every year - mutations wont cover that same variant of vaccine	itt_315	have to be be vaccinnated every year - mutations wont cover that same variant of vaccine	con
it doesn't work the vaccines ....lockdown works but as soon as come out of lockdown cases go up ....so vaccines don't help	itt_316	It doesn't work the vaccines ....lockdown works but as soon as come out of lockdown cases go up ....so vaccines don't help	con
they don't know what's in it so don't want to take it as the vaccine was developed very quickly, when under normal circumstances it normally takes at least 10 years to develop a vaccine.	itt_317	They don't know what's in it so don't want to take it as the vaccine was developed very quickly, when under normal circumstances it normally takes at least 10 years to develop a vaccine.	con
they don't need it as they are quite fit and healthy and have managed most things without having to take medication for it.	itt_318	They don't need it as they are quite fit and healthy and have managed most things without having to take medication for it.	con
they don't take vaccinations for anything.  the last time they had any vaccinations was at school and they have managed fine without having to take any further.	itt_319	They don't take vaccinations for anything.  The last time they had any vaccinations was at school and they have managed fine without having to take any further.	con
the information in the media during this period has been blatant propaganda. which would be unnecessary if the situation was really that serious. too many contradictions and lies.	itt_320	The information in the media during this period has been blatant propaganda. Which would be unnecessary if the situation was really that serious. Too many contradictions and lies.	con
blood clotting is more common in other things such as birth control , which loads of people take	itt_321	Blood clotting is more common in other things such as birth control , which loads of people take	pro
they want to protect themselves and others by reducing the chance of passing on the virus.	itt_322	They want to protect themselves and others by reducing the chance of passing on the virus.	pro
it is the most effective way to immunise the population and continue with life as normal	itt_323	It is the most effective way to immunise the population and continue with life as normal	pro
we can trust the immunologists and people who have developed the vaccine so it is safe with minimal risk	itt_324	We can trust the immunologists and people who have developed the vaccine so it is safe with minimal risk	pro
ask if the whole family are going and if they are making a thing of it?	itt_325	Ask if the whole family are going and if they are making a thing of it?	pro
be interested if they are frontline workers and how many people at work have take it so far.	itt_326	Be interested if they are frontline workers and how many people at work have take it so far.	pro
the covid vaccines may have been approved quickly but they have received large amounts of funding	itt_327	the covid vaccines may have been approved quickly but they have received large amounts of funding	pro
it will stop you from spreading the virus to other people and potentially those at risks	itt_328	it will stop you from spreading the virus to other people and potentially those at risks	pro
they want life to get back to normal which they believe can only happen after the vaccine	itt_329	they want life to get back to normal which they believe can only happen after the vaccine	pro
they may have a vulnerable family member or close friend and wants to have the vaccine to keep them safe.	itt_330	they may have a vulnerable family member or close friend and wants to have the vaccine to keep them safe.	pro
vaccination is the most effective method of providing herd immunity as it does not carry the risk of causing excess deaths that natural herd immunity does	itt_331	Vaccination is the most effective method of providing herd immunity as it does not carry the risk of causing excess deaths that natural herd immunity does	pro
being vaccinated greatly reduces risk of infection by covid-19 and even if infected symptoms are likely to be far less than if not vaccinated	itt_332	Being vaccinated greatly reduces risk of infection by Covid-19 and even if infected symptoms are likely to be far less than if not vaccinated	pro
it's already nearly eradicating the number of hospitalisations and deaths in the countries who have widely administered it so it clearly works against serious cases	itt_333	It's already nearly eradicating the number of hospitalisations and deaths in the countries who have widely administered it so it clearly works against serious cases	pro
if they do catch coronavirus, hoping that the vaccine will ensure the symptoms are less severe.	itt_334	If they do catch coronavirus, hoping that the vaccine will ensure the symptoms are less severe.	pro
by extension of being less likely to catch coronavirus, helping to stop the spread to the wider population.	itt_335	By extension of being less likely to catch coronavirus, helping to stop the spread to the wider population.	pro
itâs easy and convenient once you take the 2 jabs itâs sorted unlike other treatment options	itt_336	Itâs easy and convenient once you take the 2 jabs itâs sorted unlike other treatment options	pro
they want to protect themselves from getting covid. they will be less worried about going out etc.	itt_337	They want to protect themselves from getting Covid. They will be less worried about going out etc.	pro
they want to protect other people - make themselves less of a risk so they don't infect others	itt_338	They want to protect other people - make themselves less of a risk so they don't infect others	pro
some people simply want them so they can go abroad with less restrictions i.e. less covid tests as some countries only require a vaccine to enter	itt_339	Some people simply want them so they can go abroad with less restrictions i.e. less Covid tests as some countries only require a vaccine to enter	pro
the effectiveness and protection from the infection spreading is high, and so it is worth taking.	itt_340	The effectiveness and protection from the infection spreading is high, and so it is worth taking.	pro
very intelligent and hard working people on this earth and worked together to save lives. many people have taken the vaccine now, and only a small amount has had serious side effects.	itt_341	Very intelligent and hard working people on this earth and worked together to save lives. Many people have taken the vaccine now, and only a small amount has had serious side effects.	pro
taking the vaccine can really help save lives, as it reduces the risk of being hospitalized, and so the nhs will be well equipped to provide the needed help to those who have it worse.	itt_342	Taking the vaccine can really help save lives, as it reduces the risk of being hospitalized, and so the NHS will be well equipped to provide the needed help to those who have it worse.	pro
they want to play their part in the countries protection from the virus, the more people are vaccinated the better.	itt_343	They want to play their part in the countries protection from the virus, the more people are vaccinated the better.	pro
we can get back to some form of normality once the majority of people have been vaccinated.	itt_344	We can get back to some form of normality once the majority of people have been vaccinated.	pro
to protect the vulnerable including family members and people in their work environment that are at risk of disease	itt_345	To protect the vulnerable including family members and people in their work environment that are at risk of disease	pro
safety for others, e.g. people who have not had the vaccine yet or cannot have the vaccine	itt_346	Safety for others, e.g. people who have not had the vaccine yet or cannot have the vaccine	pro
to protect themselves and their family from infection and serious illness (and reduce the chance of death from this virus)	itt_347	To protect themselves and their family from infection and serious illness (and reduce the chance of death from this virus)	pro
to 'return to normality' with vaccinations reducing the need for lockdowns and measures in place to reduce the spread	itt_348	To 'return to normality' with vaccinations reducing the need for lockdowns and measures in place to reduce the spread	pro
it is the right thing to do to protect the community and particularly the vulnerable within the community	itt_349	It is the right thing to do to protect the community and particularly the vulnerable within the community	pro
the vaccine will help protect you and those around you who are more susceptible to the virus.	itt_350	The vaccine will help protect you and those around you who are more susceptible to the virus.	pro
it significantly decreases the likelihood that you will get covid, and if you do get it your symptoms would be less than if you didn't get the vaccine	itt_351	It significantly decreases the likelihood that you will get COVID, and if you do get it your symptoms would be less than if you didn't get the vaccine	pro
they want to go back to their old life and stop social distancing and wearing masks etc and do not want the children to miss more schooling.	itt_352	They want to go back to their old life and stop social distancing and wearing masks etc and do not want the children to miss more Schooling.	pro
they have elderly parents and feel they need to be the best protected they can be when visiting.	itt_353	They have elderly parents and feel they need to be the best protected they can be when visiting.	pro
this pandemic is the most serious in a hundred years, and vaccines are the best way of ending it.	itt_354	This pandemic is the most serious in a hundred years, and vaccines are the best way of ending it.	pro
the vaccines have been through exactly the same clinical trials as all vaccines, so are provably safe. the only reason these trials took less time was the vast resources put into it.	itt_355	The vaccines have been through exactly the same clinical trials as all vaccines, so are provably safe. The only reason these trials took less time was the vast resources put into it.	pro
it is our duty to society to be vaccinated. while you personally may not be in too much danger from covid, you could still pass it to a more vulnerable person, causing serious illness or death.	itt_356	It is our duty to society to be vaccinated. While you personally may not be in too much danger from covid, you could still pass it to a more vulnerable person, causing serious illness or death.	pro
don't want to risk getting it and passing it on to someone older or with a lower immunity.	itt_357	Don't want to risk getting it and passing it on to someone older or with a lower immunity.	pro
it protects against the virus and the sooner they have it the sooner their life goes back to normal	itt_358	It protects against the virus and the sooner they have it the sooner their life goes back to normal	pro
feels reassured there is a vaccine available as they have under lying health conditions that could be worsened	itt_359	Feels reassured there is a vaccine available as they have under lying health conditions that could be worsened	pro
they wish for life to return to normal and the best way to achieve this is maximum uptake	itt_360	They wish for life to return to normal and the best way to achieve this is maximum uptake	pro
they are aware of the risks and complications of contracting xovid 19 and wish to protect themselves and others	itt_361	They are aware of the risks and complications of contracting xovid 19 and wish to protect themselves and others	pro
to help end the negative social impact of the virus such as lockdowns and online education	itt_362	To help end the negative social impact of the virus such as lockdowns and online education	pro
they believe the vaccine will provide the best protection against covid-19 for themselves and their families/friends.	itt_363	They believe the vaccine will provide the best protection against Covid-19 for themselves and their families/friends.	pro
they feel it is their duty to ensure they are vaccinated as part of halting going transmission.	itt_364	They feel it is their duty to ensure they are vaccinated as part of halting going transmission.	pro
they feel it would be wrong not to accept a free vaccine when so many other people around the world do not have access to them.	itt_365	They feel it would be wrong not to accept a free vaccine when so many other people around the world do not have access to them.	pro
they have family members which could be vulnerable and so do not want to catch the virus.	itt_366	They have family members which could be vulnerable and so do not want to catch the virus.	pro
it protects me and other people as well so is our social duty to have one	itt_367	It protects me and other people as well so is our social duty to have one	pro
it is the best and quickest way to get our society functioning again and get the economy going	itt_368	It is the best and quickest way to get our society functioning again and get the economy going	pro
the vaccine is safe and has been tested and the side effects are very rare and unlikely to occur	itt_369	The vaccine is safe and has been tested and the side effects are very rare and unlikely to occur	pro
it will protect themselves and the people around them and therefore they want to be vaccinated.	itt_370	It will protect themselves and the people around them and therefore they want to be vaccinated.	pro
aren't we lucky/fortunate how quickly this has been developed and we are in a position where we can get a vaccine.	itt_371	Aren't we lucky/fortunate how quickly this has been developed and we are in a position where we can get a vaccine.	pro
protecting health of yourself and protecting people around you by breaking the infection trend therefore avoiding illness and hospital stays.	itt_372	Protecting Health of yourself and protecting people around you by breaking the infection trend therefore avoiding illness and hospital stays.	pro
the ability to end lockdown and restart the economy fully in turn giving us all the freedom we have been used to. by not having the vaccine the chances of leaving lockdown and having a normal reduce	itt_373	The ability to end lockdown and restart the economy fully in turn giving us all the freedom we have been used to. By not having the vaccine the chances of leaving lockdown and having a normal reduce	pro
they don't want to risk being affected by the symptoms of 'long covid' for the rest of their life	itt_374	They don't want to risk being affected by the symptoms of 'long covid' for the rest of their life	pro
so that, if they do contract covid-19 at any point, the symptoms will be minor and manageable.	itt_375	So that, if they do contract Covid-19 at any point, the symptoms will be minor and manageable.	pro
it protects me and others around me by reducing the likelihood of me spreading the disease to others.	itt_376	It protects me and others around me by reducing the likelihood of me spreading the disease to others.	pro
if everyone gets vaccinated we can slow/stop the mutations which takes away a lot of its power	itt_377	if everyone gets vaccinated we can slow/stop the mutations which takes away a lot of its power	pro
having the vaccine with a day or two max side effects is better than getting covid and dying	itt_378	having the vaccine with a day or two max side effects is better than getting covid and dying	pro
we need to return to pre covid status and normality and the vaccine will help to acheive that.	itt_379	We need to return to pre Covid status and normality and the vaccine will help to acheive that.	pro
the more people that are vaccinated the more successful we will be of bringing covid under control and get our lives back to normal	itt_380	The more people that are vaccinated the more successful we will be of bringing covid under control and get our lives back to normal	pro
they see no reason to not get vaccinated and they have been asked to do so	itt_381	They see no reason to not get vaccinated and they have been asked to do so	pro
they might be classed in a vulnerable category so getting the vaccine would help reduce the risk f them catching it and getting serious symptoms.	itt_382	They might be classed in a vulnerable category so getting the vaccine would help reduce the risk f them catching it and getting serious symptoms.	pro
someone they live with may be vulnerable too which would give them an incentive to get the vaccine to  keep these people safe.	itt_383	Someone they live with may be vulnerable too which would give them an incentive to get the vaccine to  keep these people safe.	pro
they want to go back to their "normal" lives pre-covid and the vaccine will enable them to do this freely.	itt_384	They want to go back to their "normal" lives pre-covid and the vaccine will enable them to do this freely.	pro
it will do no harm to have the vaccine, even if covid will not affect you, it will allow you do normal things again.	itt_385	It will do no harm to have the vaccine, even if COVID will not affect you, it will allow you do normal things again.	pro
it will enable the country to come out of lockdown quicker if more people are vaccinated	itt_386	It will enable the country to come out of lockdown quicker if more people are vaccinated	pro
other vaccination programmes have been successful in eradicating illnesses, so why should this be any different. having the vaccine gives us the best chance of getting back to normal.	itt_387	Other vaccination programmes have been successful in eradicating illnesses, so why should this be any different. Having the vaccine gives us the best chance of getting back to normal.	pro
it is more important to get back to normal than to be worried about the vaccine	itt_388	it is more important to get back to normal than to be worried about the vaccine	pro
vaccines have a long history of being effective against serious diseases and in some instances have pretty much erradicated them	itt_389	Vaccines have a long history of being effective against serious diseases and in some instances have pretty much erradicated them	pro
lockdown is bad for my mental health, sooner we can reduce the risk of going out the better	itt_390	Lockdown is bad for my mental health, sooner we can reduce the risk of going out the better	pro
vaccine has been given to millions already. so although proven safe in trials, this seems to be backed up in real life.	itt_391	Vaccine has been given to millions already. So although proven safe in trials, this seems to be backed up in real life.	pro
herd immunity is the best defence against a new emerging virus, or indeed an old one.	itt_392	Herd immunity is the best defence against a new emerging virus, or indeed an old one.	pro
they think it is important to reduce the affect of covid-19 on those who catch it	itt_393	They think it is important to reduce the affect of Covid-19 on those who catch it	pro
it's important for everyone to be vaccinated to protect our community, even those who might not be vaccinated.	itt_394	It's important for everyone to be vaccinated to protect our community, even those who might not be vaccinated.	pro
need it for social reasons. people who are vaccinated get special treatment from the government, shops etc.	itt_395	Need it for social reasons. People who are vaccinated get special treatment from the government, shops etc.	pro
for the covid19 passport. people who are vaccinated get a passport that will allow them to travel overseas.	itt_396	For the covid19 passport. People who are vaccinated get a passport that will allow them to travel overseas.	pro
it is a fast, free, simple way of helping protect myself and others from the virus.	itt_397	It is a fast, free, simple way of helping protect myself and others from the virus.	pro
we all need to do our part. itâs not about ourselves itâs about protecting the vulnerable.	itt_398	We all need to do our part. Itâs not about ourselves itâs about protecting the vulnerable.	pro
vaccines are not 100% effective but they will help with reducing serious symptoms of the virus so more people stay out of hospital	itt_399	vaccines are not 100% effective but they will help with reducing serious symptoms of the virus so more people stay out of hospital	pro
they trust that the vaccines have passed all trials necessary so that it is safe to supply to the population	itt_400	they trust that the vaccines have passed all trials necessary so that it is safe to supply to the population	pro
being vaccinated will mean that society could return to a more relaxed state and they would be eager to start travelling around the world for leisure again since they have been vaccinated	itt_401	being vaccinated will mean that society could return to a more relaxed state and they would be eager to start travelling around the world for leisure again since they have been vaccinated	pro
they want to protect themselves and others against dying and/or suffering both short and long-term effects because of covid.	itt_402	They want to protect themselves and others against dying and/or suffering both short and long-term effects because of COVID.	pro
they want to help reduce the impact of covid upon people and therefore the strain upon the healthcare system.	itt_403	They want to help reduce the impact of COVID upon people and therefore the strain upon the healthcare system.	pro
they want the world to be safer as soon as possible and will do any little bit to help.	itt_404	They want the world to be safer as soon as possible and will do any little bit to help.	pro
they worry that without having the vaccine they will not be able to go on holiday/ attend events because of proposed vaccine passports.	itt_405	They worry that without having the vaccine they will not be able to go on holiday/ attend events because of proposed vaccine passports.	pro
they believe in its efficacy in preventing serious disease and so feel it is the best decision for their own health.	itt_406	They believe in its efficacy in preventing serious disease and so feel it is the best decision for their own health.	pro
they believe in its efficacy in preventing the spread of covid-19 and so want to play their part in reducing transmission within the community - hopefully leading to herd immunity.	itt_407	They believe in its efficacy in preventing the spread of Covid-19 and so want to play their part in reducing transmission within the community - hopefully leading to herd immunity.	pro
they trust the medical world enough to believe that the vaccine is effective and not harmful	itt_408	they trust the medical world enough to believe that the vaccine is effective and not harmful	pro
by getting the vaccine, you not only protect yourself from covid, but you also protect others as you are less likely to spread the disease.	itt_409	By getting the vaccine, you not only protect yourself from covid, but you also protect others as you are less likely to spread the disease.	pro
the side effects from the covid-19 vaccines are mild and no worse than for other vaccines.	itt_410	The side effects from the covid-19 vaccines are mild and no worse than for other vaccines.	pro
they want their life to return to normal - no masks, businesses open again, freedom to travel.	itt_411	They want their life to return to normal - no masks, businesses open again, freedom to travel.	pro
they are worried about the ongoing effects on other peoples' health and/or the impact it is having on the economy.	itt_412	They are worried about the ongoing effects on other peoples' health and/or the impact it is having on the economy.	pro
they want to travel and may need to have the vaccine in order to do so.	itt_413	They want to travel and may need to have the vaccine in order to do so.	pro
they want to be compliant with any future rules around travel & work that may require evidence of vaccination.	itt_414	They want to be compliant with any future rules around travel & work that may require evidence of vaccination.	pro
that they want life to get back to normal as quickly as possible - i.e don't want restrictions to be imposed on their life indefinitely	itt_415	That they want life to get back to normal as quickly as possible - i.e don't want restrictions to be imposed on their life indefinitely	pro
they think it is important to protect society at large and prevent the spread so we can all get back to normal.	itt_416	They think it is important to protect society at large and prevent the spread so we can all get back to normal.	pro
the process for approving a vaccine is extremely strict and if there were serious health concerns, then the vaccine would not have been approved.	itt_417	The process for approving a vaccine is extremely strict and if there were serious health concerns, then the vaccine would not have been approved.	pro
the scientific community has come together to produce the vaccines and whilst covid is a new disease, the types of processes used to develop the vaccine have been in development previously e.g mrna	itt_418	The scientific community has come together to produce the vaccines and whilst Covid is a new disease, the types of processes used to develop the vaccine have been in development previously e.g MRNA	pro
that they have pre existing medical conditions and feel there body isnt strong enough to fight off covid 19 by itself.	itt_419	That they have pre existing medical conditions and feel there body isnt strong enough to fight off covid 19 by itself.	pro
covid 19-vaccines are effective. they can keep you from getting and spreading the virus that causes covid-19	itt_420	COVID 19-vaccines are effective. They can keep you from getting and spreading the virus that causes COVID-19	pro
after you are fully vaccinated for covid-19, you can resume many activities that you did before the pandemic.	itt_421	After you are fully vaccinated for COVID-19, you can resume many activities that you did before the pandemic.	pro
if you get covid-19, you also risk giving it to loved ones who may get very sick. getting a covid-19 vaccine is a safer choice.	itt_422	If you get COVID-19, you also risk giving it to loved ones who may get very sick. Getting a COVID-19 vaccine is a safer choice.	pro
that in taking the vaccine they are protecting only themselves but also their loved ones and wider community.	itt_423	That in taking the vaccine they are protecting only themselves but also their loved ones and wider community.	pro
the number of cases dropped dramatically when vaccinations were rolled out, so it has been proven to work.	itt_424	The number of cases dropped dramatically when vaccinations were rolled out, so it has been proven to work.	pro
it is the responsible thing to do to protect society as a whole, including others more vulnerable than ourselves.	itt_425	It is the responsible thing to do to protect society as a whole, including others more vulnerable than ourselves.	pro
to be able to return to a normal life with fewer restrictions on socialising, travel etc.	itt_426	To be able to return to a normal life with fewer restrictions on socialising, travel etc.	pro
there's a long history of successful vaccines which help to save millions of lives. this is the same	itt_427	There's a long history of successful vaccines which help to save millions of lives. This is the same	pro
they want to be able to be unrestricted from travel etc and want the vaccine as proof (for flights, events etc)	itt_428	They want to be able to be unrestricted from travel etc and want the vaccine as proof (for flights, events etc)	pro
because it is the right thing to do and is safe and everyone worldwide needs to be vaccinated to best covid 19	itt_429	Because it is the right thing to do and is safe and everyone worldwide needs to be vaccinated to best Covid 19	pro
any side effect that does result from the vaccine is far easier to help and cure than covid itself.	itt_430	Any side effect that does result from the vaccine is far easier to help and cure than Covid itself.	pro
to protect the nhs - the more people that are vaccinated, the less likely people will develop serious symptoms of covid, therefore resulting in the number of patients being admitted into icu at a low.	itt_431	To protect the NHS - the more people that are vaccinated, the less likely people will develop serious symptoms of COVID, therefore resulting in the number of patients being admitted into ICU at a low.	pro
this risks are minimal and as herd immunity was not an option, this is second best	itt_432	This risks are minimal and as herd immunity was not an option, this is second best	pro
it will protect me from covid or at least my chances of being hospitalised are greatly reduced.	itt_433	It will protect me from Covid or at least my chances of being hospitalised are greatly reduced.	pro
if enough people have the vaccination we will be able to hopefully stop the spread and get back to a normal life.	itt_434	If enough people have the vaccination we will be able to hopefully stop the spread and get back to a normal life.	pro
they want to get back to pre-covid activities and believe vaccines are the way to do that	itt_435	They want to get back to pre-Covid activities and believe vaccines are the way to do that	pro
they see no harm in having it, they are pro vaccine and would have gotten vaccinated for a disease whether there was a pandemic or not	itt_436	They see no harm in having it, they are pro vaccine and would have gotten vaccinated for a disease whether there was a pandemic or not	pro
as they want to travel or go to places where there is a lot of people	itt_437	As they want to travel or go to places where there is a lot of people	pro
once you are fully vaccinated, you can start doing what you did before the pandemic started	itt_438	Once you are fully vaccinated, you can start doing what you did before the pandemic started	pro
it's selfish not to get it as it can help to provide herd immunity for those who cannot get the vaccine	itt_439	It's selfish not to get it as it can help to provide herd immunity for those who cannot get the vaccine	pro
they are happy that there has been enough time to produce and test the vaccine safely.	itt_440	They are happy that there has been enough time to produce and test the vaccine safely.	pro
by taking the vaccine you protect older member of your family, for which the covid-19 might be much more dangerous.	itt_441	By taking the vaccine you protect older member of your family, for which the COVID-19 might be much more dangerous.	pro
they want to reduce the risk of them becoming very ill or dying if they contract covid 19.	itt_442	They want to reduce the risk of them becoming very ill or dying if they contract Covid 19.	pro
they want to reduce their transmissibility of spreading the virus to others if they contract it.	itt_443	They want to reduce their transmissibility of spreading the virus to others if they contract it.	pro
they have to work and/or live with vulnerable people that requires them to be protected as much as possible.	itt_444	They have to work and/or live with vulnerable people that requires them to be protected as much as possible.	pro
they want the covid to disappear so that they can see loved ones and go on holiday etc.	itt_445	They want the covid to disappear so that they can see loved ones and go on holiday etc.	pro
they're looking for a brighter future sooner and hope that everyone is being safe and responsible	itt_446	They're looking for a brighter future sooner and hope that everyone is being safe and responsible	pro
holidays, nightlife, shopping etc. will be so much easier and without concerned people once the virus is under complete control	itt_447	Holidays, nightlife, shopping etc. Will be so much easier and without concerned people once the virus is under complete control	pro
the vaccine is the most effective method we have of reducing the effects of the virus	itt_448	The vaccine is the most effective method we have of reducing the effects of the virus	pro
to try and eradicate covid so that we can go back to living a normal life	itt_449	To try and eradicate covid so that we can go back to living a normal life	pro
they want a vaccine to prevent general spread of the disease, so any restrictions can be lifted and life can go back to normal.	itt_450	They want a vaccine to prevent general spread of the disease, so any restrictions can be lifted and life can go back to normal.	pro
they want the vaccine as they are vulnerable to the disease and want to protect themselves, or they don't want to experience any symptoms in the first place.	itt_451	They want the vaccine as they are vulnerable to the disease and want to protect themselves, or they don't want to experience any symptoms in the first place.	pro
they want the vaccine so they can interact with vulnerable friends or relatives, such as grandparents.	itt_452	They want the vaccine so they can interact with vulnerable friends or relatives, such as grandparents.	pro
they have been told it's best for them so will listen to the advice given by the government.	itt_453	They have been told it's best for them so will listen to the advice given by the government.	pro
the government and health professionals would not encourage us to have it if it hadnât been thoroughly tested.	itt_454	The government and health professionals would not encourage us to have it if it hadnât been thoroughly tested.	pro
return to life - they want things to go back to normal as quickly as possible and getting vaccinated is a step on that path	itt_455	Return to life - They want things to go back to normal as quickly as possible and getting vaccinated is a step on that path	pro
protect people - getting vaccinated helps to eradicate the disease stopping the spread to friends and family	itt_456	Protect people - Getting vaccinated helps to eradicate the disease stopping the spread to friends and family	pro
they have seen the effects - they know someone/had it themselves and want to avoid this outcome again	itt_457	they have seen the effects - They know someone/had it themselves and want to avoid this outcome again	pro
the vaccine will save lives; if enough of the population is vaccinated there will no longer be a risk from covid	itt_458	The vaccine will save lives; if enough of the population is vaccinated there will no longer be a risk from covid	pro
the vaccine is safe, it has been tested and proven to work. there has been a lot of investment from countries, more so than other vaccinations	itt_459	The vaccine is safe, it has been tested and proven to work. There has been a lot of investment from countries, more so than other vaccinations	pro
getting fully vaccinated will help to give some form of protection to myself and others around me	itt_460	Getting fully vaccinated will help to give some form of protection to myself and others around me	pro
it is a better alternative to social distancing and isolation techniques which will not treat the disease, but only attempt to minimise the spread.	itt_461	It is a better alternative to social distancing and isolation techniques which will not treat the disease, but only attempt to minimise the spread.	pro
it was created by the top scientists and groups who we should trust and therefore get the vaccination.	itt_462	It was created by the top scientists and groups who we should trust and therefore get the vaccination.	pro
iâm happy with the amount of testing has been done it was a short period of time but the entire world was involved at an accelerated pace	itt_463	Iâm happy with the amount of testing has been done it was a short period of time but the entire world was involved at an accelerated pace	pro
the tests have shown that the vaccine is effective so why wouldn't you want to get it?	itt_464	The tests have shown that the vaccine is effective so why wouldn't you want to get it?	pro
it will help the world get back to normal as we can protect ourselves and others.	itt_465	It will help the world get back to normal as we can protect ourselves and others.	pro
vaccines have helped humanity so much, they helped eradicate illnesses such as polio and small pocks.	itt_466	Vaccines have helped humanity so much, they helped eradicate illnesses such as polio and small pocks.	pro
vaccines won't track you. cell phones track you. besides, your mundane personal life really isn't that interesting to the government. they aren't watching you.	itt_467	Vaccines won't track you. Cell phones track you. Besides, your mundane personal life really isn't that interesting to the government. They aren't watching you.	pro
we can get back to as near as normal as soon as possible the more people are vaccinated.	itt_468	We can get back to as near as normal as soon as possible the more people are vaccinated.	pro
past vaccination roll outs have been successful to prevent the spread of terrible diseases like measles & polio	itt_469	Past vaccination roll outs have been successful to prevent the spread of terrible diseases like Measles & Polio	pro
it will ease pressure on the nhs and allow them too start seeing other patients again.	itt_470	It will ease pressure on the NHS and allow them too start seeing other patients again.	pro
like the flu vaccine, it will limit the chances of you getting seriously ill if infected.	itt_471	Like the Flu vaccine, It will limit the chances of you getting seriously ill if infected.	pro
it is the right thing to do for the world as a whole. the more people who get vaccinated the better it is for everyone and the world can get back to normal again.	itt_472	It is the right thing to do for the world as a whole. The more people who get vaccinated the better it is for everyone and the world can get back to normal again.	pro
we are in a privileged position to be offered the vaccine, we should take the chance to receive it to protect ourselves and others around us	itt_473	We are in a privileged position to be offered the vaccine, we should take the chance to receive it to protect ourselves and others around us	pro
slight side effects from a vaccine are better than dying or becoming gravely ill with coronavirus.	itt_474	Slight side effects from a vaccine are better than dying or becoming gravely ill with coronavirus.	pro
the more people that get vaccinated the safer it is for everyone. people who don't get vaccinated are selfish & risk other people's lives as well as their own (including their own loved ones!)	itt_475	The more people that get vaccinated the safer it is for everyone. People who don't get vaccinated are selfish & risk other people's lives as well as their own (including their own loved ones!)	pro
they want to travel and feel this is the only way to be able to do so	itt_476	They want to travel and feel this is the only way to be able to do so	pro
it will help us all get back to a normal way of life with no restrictions	itt_477	It will help us all get back to a normal way of life with no restrictions	pro
my friend whos a nurse said that she was happy to get it to protect herself, her family and her patients.	itt_478	My friend whos a nurse said that she was happy to get it to protect herself, her family and her patients.	pro
travel/entertainment reasons, vaccines are required for travel abroad in some airports and some businesses may require proof of vaccination before allowing entry	itt_479	Travel/entertainment reasons, vaccines are required for travel abroad in some airports and some businesses may require proof of vaccination before allowing entry	pro
we need a vaccine to fight the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.	We need a vaccine to fight the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	Vaccines protect us from diseases by giving us immunity without getting sick.	Resources should be focused on containing the spread of Covid-19 through methods that have already been invested in and have been proven promising.	There are other medical alternatives to tackle the Covid-19 pandemic.	We do need a vaccine for Covid 19. We don’t have one yet.	Vaccines will most effectively bring the pandemic under control, while also minimizing the possibility of a future outbreak of Covid-19.	By more quickly allowing for a return to normal conditions, vaccines would be better for the economy of affected countries.
vaccines protect us from diseases by giving us immunity without getting sick.	0_1.1.	Vaccines protect us from diseases by giving us immunity without getting sick.	pro	By avoiding sickness, a significant number of lives are saved.	By avoiding sickness, many people are saved from health complications that may arise from contracting Covid-19.	A vaccine stimulates the production of antibodies that can then be used to fight off Covid-19, if the virus is encountered.	A vaccine-induced dependency, even a symbolic one, of humankind on medicine might be detrimental.	A vaccine only protects those who are willing to take it from the disease. Many people will not be willing to take a vaccine.
by avoiding sickness, a significant number of lives are saved.	0_1.1.1.	By avoiding sickness, a significant number of lives are saved.	pro	More than 4,000,000 lives have been lost due to the Covid-19 pandemic.	The mortality rate for Covid-19 has fallen precipitously as treatment methods have improved. It is possible that we can get the mortality rate even lower over time, reducing the need for vaccines.	In places where Covid-19 patients overrun healthcare facilities, patients with other diseases are often left without adequate care, leading to further deaths.
more than 4,000,000 lives have been lost due to the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.1.1.1.	More than 4,000,000 lives have been lost due to the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	Many frontline workers, such as doctors, have lost their lives while treating Covid-19 patients.
many frontline workers, such as doctors, have lost their lives while treating covid-19 patients.	0_1.1.1.1.1.	Many frontline workers, such as doctors, have lost their lives while treating Covid-19 patients.	pro	
the mortality rate for covid-19 has fallen precipitously as treatment methods have improved. it is possible that we can get the mortality rate even lower over time, reducing the need for vaccines.	0_1.1.1.2.	The mortality rate for Covid-19 has fallen precipitously as treatment methods have improved. It is possible that we can get the mortality rate even lower over time, reducing the need for vaccines.	con	If vaccines themselves are shown to reduce mortality rates, it is unethical to pursue a less effective option, as this would unnecessarily prolong the suffering for the victims.
if vaccines themselves are shown to reduce mortality rates, it is unethical to pursue a less effective option, as this would unnecessarily prolong the suffering for the victims.	0_1.1.1.2.1.	If vaccines themselves are shown to reduce mortality rates, it is unethical to pursue a less effective option, as this would unnecessarily prolong the suffering for the victims.	pro	
in places where covid-19 patients overrun healthcare facilities, patients with other diseases are often left without adequate care, leading to further deaths.	0_1.1.1.3.	In places where Covid-19 patients overrun healthcare facilities, patients with other diseases are often left without adequate care, leading to further deaths.	pro	Studies have found(Dramatic reductions were detected in the demand for, and supply of, cancer services which have not fully recovered with lockdown easing. These may contribute, over a 1-year time horizon, to substantial excess mortality among people with cancer and multimorbidity.) that Covid-19 has reduced or delayed cancer treatments, contributing to higher mortality rates from otherwise treatable conditions.
studies have found(dramatic reductions were detected in the demand for, and supply of, cancer services which have not fully recovered with lockdown easing. these may contribute, over a 1-year time horizon, to substantial excess mortality among people with cancer and multimorbidity.) that covid-19 has reduced or delayed cancer treatments, contributing to higher mortality rates from otherwise treatable conditions.	0_1.1.1.3.1.	Studies have found(Dramatic reductions were detected in the demand for, and supply of, cancer services which have not fully recovered with lockdown easing. These may contribute, over a 1-year time horizon, to substantial excess mortality among people with cancer and multimorbidity.) that Covid-19 has reduced or delayed cancer treatments, contributing to higher mortality rates from otherwise treatable conditions.	pro	
by avoiding sickness, many people are saved from health complications that may arise from contracting covid-19.	0_1.1.2.	By avoiding sickness, many people are saved from health complications that may arise from contracting Covid-19.	pro	Some people experience new or ongoing symptoms for weeks or months after initial infection by SARS-CoV-2.	Older adults, who are at greater risk of suffering from severe symptoms of Covid-19 infection, are particularly benefited.	Many people (both with severe and mild symptoms) who contract Covid-19 suffer from long Covid.	Only 37.6% of adults in the US are at risk of serious complications arising from Covid-19. This percentage decreases even further for younger age groups.
some people experience new or ongoing symptoms for weeks or months after initial infection by sars-cov-2.	0_1.1.2.1.	Some people experience new or ongoing symptoms for weeks or months after initial infection by SARS-CoV-2.	pro	
older adults, who are at greater risk of suffering from severe symptoms of covid-19 infection, are particularly benefited.	0_1.1.2.2.	Older adults, who are at greater risk of suffering from severe symptoms of Covid-19 infection, are particularly benefited.	pro	
many people (both with severe and mild symptoms) who contract covid-19 suffer from long covid.	0_1.1.2.3.	Many people (both with severe and mild symptoms) who contract Covid-19 suffer from long Covid.	pro	
only 37.6% of adults in the us are at risk of serious complications arising from covid-19. this percentage decreases even further for younger age groups.	0_1.1.2.4.	Only 37.6% of adults in the US are at risk of serious complications arising from Covid-19. This percentage decreases even further for younger age groups.	con	That is still a population of tens of millions of people who will suffer needlessly by not taking a vaccine.
that is still a population of tens of millions of people who will suffer needlessly by not taking a vaccine.	0_1.1.2.4.1.	That is still a population of tens of millions of people who will suffer needlessly by not taking a vaccine.	pro	
a vaccine stimulates the production of antibodies that can then be used to fight off covid-19, if the virus is encountered.	0_1.1.3.	A vaccine stimulates the production of antibodies that can then be used to fight off Covid-19, if the virus is encountered.	pro	Vaccines are not perfect in fighting off the virus, as a number of "breakthrough cases(A total of 10,262 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine breakthrough infections had been reported from 46 U.S. states and territories as of April 30, 2021.)" (instances where fully vaccinated people have still contracted Covid-19) have occurred.
vaccines are not perfect in fighting off the virus, as a number of "breakthrough cases(a total of 10,262 sars-cov-2 vaccine breakthrough infections had been reported from 46 u.s. states and territories as of april 30, 2021.)" (instances where fully vaccinated people have still contracted covid-19) have occurred.	0_1.1.3.1.	Vaccines are not perfect in fighting off the virus, as a number of "breakthrough cases(A total of 10,262 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine breakthrough infections had been reported from 46 U.S. states and territories as of April 30, 2021.)" (instances where fully vaccinated people have still contracted Covid-19) have occurred.	con	Breakthrough cases are almost always mild and are expected by health experts in instances of mass vaccination.
breakthrough cases are almost always mild and are expected by health experts in instances of mass vaccination.	0_1.1.3.1.1.	Breakthrough cases are almost always mild and are expected by health experts in instances of mass vaccination.	pro	In June of 2021, nearly all deaths in the US caused by Covid-19 were among the unvaccinated.
in june of 2021, nearly all deaths in the us caused by covid-19 were among the unvaccinated.	0_1.1.3.1.1.1.	In June of 2021, nearly all deaths in the US caused by Covid-19 were among the unvaccinated.	pro	
a vaccine-induced dependency, even a symbolic one, of humankind on medicine might be detrimental.	0_1.1.4.	A vaccine-induced dependency, even a symbolic one, of humankind on medicine might be detrimental.	con	We are currently dependent on vaccines too.	We have depended on vaccines many times throughout history to reduce or eliminate harmful diseases.	Vaccine dependence could result in the emergence of vaccine resistant viruses.	Humankind must strive to be self-sufficient.
we are currently dependent on vaccines too.	0_1.1.4.1.	We are currently dependent on vaccines too.	pro	People have many different vaccines administered throughout their lives to protect themselves from diseases that would otherwise be fatal.	While many people take vaccines for various diseases, vaccines are not universally administered or depended upon for survival in the same way that people depend on other basic necessities.
people have many different vaccines administered throughout their lives to protect themselves from diseases that would otherwise be fatal.	0_1.1.4.1.1.	People have many different vaccines administered throughout their lives to protect themselves from diseases that would otherwise be fatal.	pro	
while many people take vaccines for various diseases, vaccines are not universally administered or depended upon for survival in the same way that people depend on other basic necessities.	0_1.1.4.1.2.	While many people take vaccines for various diseases, vaccines are not universally administered or depended upon for survival in the same way that people depend on other basic necessities.	con	
we have depended on vaccines many times throughout history to reduce or eliminate harmful diseases.	0_1.1.4.2.	We have depended on vaccines many times throughout history to reduce or eliminate harmful diseases.	pro	The eradication of smallpox, one of the most deadly diseases in history, was made possible by the use of vaccines.
the eradication of smallpox, one of the most deadly diseases in history, was made possible by the use of vaccines.	0_1.1.4.2.1.	The eradication of smallpox, one of the most deadly diseases in history, was made possible by the use of vaccines.	pro	
vaccine dependence could result in the emergence of vaccine resistant viruses.	0_1.1.4.3.	Vaccine dependence could result in the emergence of vaccine resistant viruses.	con	Vaccine resistance is rare and measures could be put in place to identify vaccines at risk of failure before they are released.
vaccine resistance is rare and measures could be put in place to identify vaccines at risk of failure before they are released.	0_1.1.4.3.1.	Vaccine resistance is rare and measures could be put in place to identify vaccines at risk of failure before they are released.	pro	
humankind must strive to be self-sufficient.	0_1.1.4.4.	Humankind must strive to be self-sufficient.	con	It is not clear why self-sufficiency is morally superior to taking medicines that greatly reduce human suffering.
it is not clear why self-sufficiency is morally superior to taking medicines that greatly reduce human suffering.	0_1.1.4.4.1.	It is not clear why self-sufficiency is morally superior to taking medicines that greatly reduce human suffering.	pro	
a vaccine only protects those who are willing to take it from the disease. many people will not be willing to take a vaccine.	0_1.1.5.	A vaccine only protects those who are willing to take it from the disease. Many people will not be willing to take a vaccine.	con	5% of people across the world disagree that vaccines are effective.	7% of the global population disagrees that vaccines are safe.	Governments can implement measures which mandate the population to take vaccines.
5% of people across the world disagree that vaccines are effective.	0_1.1.5.1.	5% of people across the world disagree that vaccines are effective.	con	Achieving herd immunity for Covid-19 is estimated(The estimate for COVID-19 is that roughly 70% to 85% of the population will need to be vaccinated to reach the herd immunity threshold, although this will likely be a moving target as we move into different stages of the pandemic.) to require around 70-85% vaccination levels, so it is okay if 5% of the world doesn't get vaccinated.	This number is substantially higher for the Covid-19 vaccine.
achieving herd immunity for covid-19 is estimated(the estimate for covid-19 is that roughly 70% to 85% of the population will need to be vaccinated to reach the herd immunity threshold, although this will likely be a moving target as we move into different stages of the pandemic.) to require around 70-85% vaccination levels, so it is okay if 5% of the world doesn't get vaccinated.	0_1.1.5.1.1.	Achieving herd immunity for Covid-19 is estimated(The estimate for COVID-19 is that roughly 70% to 85% of the population will need to be vaccinated to reach the herd immunity threshold, although this will likely be a moving target as we move into different stages of the pandemic.) to require around 70-85% vaccination levels, so it is okay if 5% of the world doesn't get vaccinated.	pro	
this number is substantially higher for the covid-19 vaccine.	0_1.1.5.1.2.	This number is substantially higher for the Covid-19 vaccine.	con	
7% of the global population disagrees that vaccines are safe.	0_1.1.5.2.	7% of the global population disagrees that vaccines are safe.	con	Many people are worried that the Covid-19 vaccines will have unknown long-term side effects.	Many people are worried about serious side effects(In May, Clapton said he had experienced a "severe" reaction to the AstraZeneca vaccine. In a letter to Mr Monotti, he blamed "propaganda" for overstating the safety of the vaccine. He added that he feared the "disastrous" reaction would leave him unable to play music again.) that can result from receiving the Covid-19 vaccine.
many people are worried that the covid-19 vaccines will have unknown long-term side effects.	0_1.1.5.2.1.	Many people are worried that the Covid-19 vaccines will have unknown long-term side effects.	con	Scientific evidence strongly suggests that any long-term side effects from the technology used to produce Covid-19 vaccines are highly unlikely.	The speed at which Covid-19 vaccines went from conception to deployment was unprecedented in modern medicine, causing some people to doubt their safety.
scientific evidence strongly suggests that any long-term side effects from the technology used to produce covid-19 vaccines are highly unlikely.	0_1.1.5.2.1.1.	Scientific evidence strongly suggests that any long-term side effects from the technology used to produce Covid-19 vaccines are highly unlikely.	pro	
the speed at which covid-19 vaccines went from conception to deployment was unprecedented in modern medicine, causing some people to doubt their safety.	0_1.1.5.2.1.2.	The speed at which Covid-19 vaccines went from conception to deployment was unprecedented in modern medicine, causing some people to doubt their safety.	con	
many people are worried about serious side effects(in may, clapton said he had experienced a "severe" reaction to the astrazeneca vaccine. in a letter to mr monotti, he blamed "propaganda" for overstating the safety of the vaccine. he added that he feared the "disastrous" reaction would leave him unable to play music again.) that can result from receiving the covid-19 vaccine.	0_1.1.5.2.2.	Many people are worried about serious side effects(In May, Clapton said he had experienced a "severe" reaction to the AstraZeneca vaccine. In a letter to Mr Monotti, he blamed "propaganda" for overstating the safety of the vaccine. He added that he feared the "disastrous" reaction would leave him unable to play music again.) that can result from receiving the Covid-19 vaccine.	con	There is overwhelming evidence to support the safety of approved Covid-19 vaccines, and any serious side effects have been found to be extremely rare.
there is overwhelming evidence to support the safety of approved covid-19 vaccines, and any serious side effects have been found to be extremely rare.	0_1.1.5.2.2.1.	There is overwhelming evidence to support the safety of approved Covid-19 vaccines, and any serious side effects have been found to be extremely rare.	pro	
governments can implement measures which mandate the population to take vaccines.	0_1.1.5.3.	Governments can implement measures which mandate the population to take vaccines.	pro	Some reports indicate(Mandating vaccination may be unavoidable in some cases. But our new evidence from Germany suggests that it could hurt voluntary compliance, prolonging the pandemic and raising its social costs.) that vaccine mandates would dampen public trust in institutions and prove counterproductive to fighting Covid-19.	A study found that the majority of people support vaccine mandates in certain circumstances, such as for educational workers.
some reports indicate(mandating vaccination may be unavoidable in some cases. but our new evidence from germany suggests that it could hurt voluntary compliance, prolonging the pandemic and raising its social costs.) that vaccine mandates would dampen public trust in institutions and prove counterproductive to fighting covid-19.	0_1.1.5.3.1.	Some reports indicate(Mandating vaccination may be unavoidable in some cases. But our new evidence from Germany suggests that it could hurt voluntary compliance, prolonging the pandemic and raising its social costs.) that vaccine mandates would dampen public trust in institutions and prove counterproductive to fighting Covid-19.	con	
a study found that the majority of people support vaccine mandates in certain circumstances, such as for educational workers.	0_1.1.5.3.2.	A study found that the majority of people support vaccine mandates in certain circumstances, such as for educational workers.	pro	
resources should be focused on containing the spread of covid-19 through methods that have already been invested in and have been proven promising.	0_1.2.	Resources should be focused on containing the spread of Covid-19 through methods that have already been invested in and have been proven promising.	con	A Covid-19 vaccine should be a last resort rather than the default go to option.	Lockdowns are also effective in fighting Covid-19, potentially saving millions of lives.	The point of the global medical industry is to cure diseases. It is unclear why it should not attempt to cure Covid-19 as well.	It is more realistic to keep using tested social distancing methods such as monitoring, testing, and contact tracing.	Other methods of containing Covid-19 have not proven effective.
a covid-19 vaccine should be a last resort rather than the default go to option.	0_1.2.1.	A Covid-19 vaccine should be a last resort rather than the default go to option.	con	
lockdowns are also effective in fighting covid-19, potentially saving millions of lives.	0_1.2.2.	Lockdowns are also effective in fighting Covid-19, potentially saving millions of lives.	con	Just by social distancing and not coming in contact with others outside your family, the Covid-19 pandemic can be stopped.	Lockdowns cause severe economic disruption(Our estimates suggest that the lockdown reduces global output by about 33% at the peak of the lockdown, with the yearly impact being more than 9% of annual GDP.) and are unsustainable in the long term.	Lockdowns are unlikely to completely eradicate(“Eradicating this virus right now from the world is a lot like trying to plan the construction of a stepping-stone pathway to the Moon. It’s unrealistic,” says Michael Osterholm, an epidemiologist at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.) the virus, making it likely that the virus will reemerge after lockdowns end.
just by social distancing and not coming in contact with others outside your family, the covid-19 pandemic can be stopped.	0_1.2.2.1.	Just by social distancing and not coming in contact with others outside your family, the Covid-19 pandemic can be stopped.	con	This is unrealistic, as the global economy relies on people leaving their homes to produce and transport items necessary for survival.	Since the elderly are by far the group most susceptible to severe Covid-19 symptoms, if they remain isolated, the worst effects of the disease will be mitigated.	Long term isolation comes with many negative repercussions for the entire family.
this is unrealistic, as the global economy relies on people leaving their homes to produce and transport items necessary for survival.	0_1.2.2.1.1.	This is unrealistic, as the global economy relies on people leaving their homes to produce and transport items necessary for survival.	pro	There are over 55 million 'essential workers' in the US alone who are needed to perform their jobs if society is to function.	The Covid-19 pandemic has spurred the development of autonomous technology that can be used to deliver goods, reducing the number of humans needed.	Only those with white collar jobs that can be performed online have the luxury of working from home during the Covid-19 pandemic.
there are over 55 million 'essential workers' in the us alone who are needed to perform their jobs if society is to function.	0_1.2.2.1.1.1.	There are over 55 million 'essential workers' in the US alone who are needed to perform their jobs if society is to function.	pro	
the covid-19 pandemic has spurred the development of autonomous technology that can be used to deliver goods, reducing the number of humans needed.	0_1.2.2.1.1.2.	The Covid-19 pandemic has spurred the development of autonomous technology that can be used to deliver goods, reducing the number of humans needed.	con	This could potentially result in widespread job losses, which will be bad for people's livelihoods.
this could potentially result in widespread job losses, which will be bad for people's livelihoods.	0_1.2.2.1.1.2.1.	This could potentially result in widespread job losses, which will be bad for people's livelihoods.	pro	
only those with white collar jobs that can be performed online have the luxury of working from home during the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.2.2.1.1.3.	Only those with white collar jobs that can be performed online have the luxury of working from home during the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	Lockdowns in many developing countries forced millions of people(When India's lockdown was announced, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave just four hours' notice, leaving millions of migrant workers who live hand-to-mouth without an income or a bed as factories and construction sites closed down.) into poverty, following the loss of their jobs.
lockdowns in many developing countries forced millions of people(when india's lockdown was announced, prime minister narendra modi gave just four hours' notice, leaving millions of migrant workers who live hand-to-mouth without an income or a bed as factories and construction sites closed down.) into poverty, following the loss of their jobs.	0_1.2.2.1.1.3.1.	Lockdowns in many developing countries forced millions of people(When India's lockdown was announced, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave just four hours' notice, leaving millions of migrant workers who live hand-to-mouth without an income or a bed as factories and construction sites closed down.) into poverty, following the loss of their jobs.	pro	
since the elderly are by far the group most susceptible to severe covid-19 symptoms, if they remain isolated, the worst effects of the disease will be mitigated.	0_1.2.2.1.2.	Since the elderly are by far the group most susceptible to severe Covid-19 symptoms, if they remain isolated, the worst effects of the disease will be mitigated.	con	It is unethical to force the elderly to remain isolated instead of developing a vaccine that could allow them to live normally.	There are over 703 million(There were 703 million persons aged 65 years or over in the world in 2019. The number of older persons is projected to double to 1.5 billion in 2050. Globally, the share of the population aged 65 years or over increased from 6 per cent in 1990 to 9 per cent in 2019.) elderly people around the world (p.1). It is unfeasible to isolate such a large percentage of the population.	Because many elderly people do not work, having them remain isolated will not be too detrimental to the economy.
it is unethical to force the elderly to remain isolated instead of developing a vaccine that could allow them to live normally.	0_1.2.2.1.2.1.	It is unethical to force the elderly to remain isolated instead of developing a vaccine that could allow them to live normally.	pro	Loneliness caused by prolonged isolation results in many negative health effects for senior citizens.
loneliness caused by prolonged isolation results in many negative health effects for senior citizens.	0_1.2.2.1.2.1.1.	Loneliness caused by prolonged isolation results in many negative health effects for senior citizens.	pro	
there are over 703 million(there were 703 million persons aged 65 years or over in the world in 2019. the number of older persons is projected to double to 1.5 billion in 2050. globally, the share of the population aged 65 years or over increased from 6 per cent in 1990 to 9 per cent in 2019.) elderly people around the world (p.1). it is unfeasible to isolate such a large percentage of the population.	0_1.2.2.1.2.2.	There are over 703 million(There were 703 million persons aged 65 years or over in the world in 2019. The number of older persons is projected to double to 1.5 billion in 2050. Globally, the share of the population aged 65 years or over increased from 6 per cent in 1990 to 9 per cent in 2019.) elderly people around the world (p.1). It is unfeasible to isolate such a large percentage of the population.	pro	Elderly people often live with their families, which comprise of younger age groups. Unless the rest of the family is also isolated, this would be very difficult to accomplish.
elderly people often live with their families, which comprise of younger age groups. unless the rest of the family is also isolated, this would be very difficult to accomplish.	0_1.2.2.1.2.2.1.	Elderly people often live with their families, which comprise of younger age groups. Unless the rest of the family is also isolated, this would be very difficult to accomplish.	pro	
because many elderly people do not work, having them remain isolated will not be too detrimental to the economy.	0_1.2.2.1.2.3.	Because many elderly people do not work, having them remain isolated will not be too detrimental to the economy.	con	In recent years, the percentage of elderly workers has grown in many countries with an aging population.
in recent years, the percentage of elderly workers has grown in many countries with an aging population.	0_1.2.2.1.2.3.1.	In recent years, the percentage of elderly workers has grown in many countries with an aging population.	pro	
long term isolation comes with many negative repercussions for the entire family.	0_1.2.2.1.3.	Long term isolation comes with many negative repercussions for the entire family.	pro	Isolating with family can increase the risk of domestic violence and reduce options for victims to find support.	Children unable to attend school suffer learning loss(The Netherlands underwent only a relatively short lockdown (8 wk) and features an equitable system of school funding and the world’s highest rate of broadband access. Still, our results reveal a learning loss of about 3 percentile points or 0.08 standard deviations. The effect is equivalent to one-fifth of a school year, the same period that schools remained closed. Losses are up to 60% larger among students from less-educated homes, confirming worries about the uneven toll of the pandemic on children and families.) and negative health effects(Studies from Australia, Spain and China showed an increase in depressive symptoms and decrease in life satisfaction. A decrease in physical activity and increase in unhealthy food consumption were shown in studies from two countries. There was a decrease in the number of visits to the emergency department in four countries, an increase in child mortality in Cameroon and a decrease by over 50% of immunisations administered in Pakistan. A significant drop of 39% in child protection medical examination referrals during 2020 compared with the previous years was found in the UK, a decrease in allegations of child abuse and neglect by almost one-third due to school closures in Florida, and an increase in the number of children with physical child abuse trauma was found in one centre in the USA.).	Elderly people often live with their families, which comprise of younger age groups. Unless the rest of the family is also isolated, this would be very difficult to accomplish.
isolating with family can increase the risk of domestic violence and reduce options for victims to find support.	0_1.2.2.1.3.1.	Isolating with family can increase the risk of domestic violence and reduce options for victims to find support.	pro	
children unable to attend school suffer learning loss(the netherlands underwent only a relatively short lockdown (8 wk) and features an equitable system of school funding and the world’s highest rate of broadband access. still, our results reveal a learning loss of about 3 percentile points or 0.08 standard deviations. the effect is equivalent to one-fifth of a school year, the same period that schools remained closed. losses are up to 60% larger among students from less-educated homes, confirming worries about the uneven toll of the pandemic on children and families.) and negative health effects(studies from australia, spain and china showed an increase in depressive symptoms and decrease in life satisfaction. a decrease in physical activity and increase in unhealthy food consumption were shown in studies from two countries. there was a decrease in the number of visits to the emergency department in four countries, an increase in child mortality in cameroon and a decrease by over 50% of immunisations administered in pakistan. a significant drop of 39% in child protection medical examination referrals during 2020 compared with the previous years was found in the uk, a decrease in allegations of child abuse and neglect by almost one-third due to school closures in florida, and an increase in the number of children with physical child abuse trauma was found in one centre in the usa.).	0_1.2.2.1.3.2.	Children unable to attend school suffer learning loss(The Netherlands underwent only a relatively short lockdown (8 wk) and features an equitable system of school funding and the world’s highest rate of broadband access. Still, our results reveal a learning loss of about 3 percentile points or 0.08 standard deviations. The effect is equivalent to one-fifth of a school year, the same period that schools remained closed. Losses are up to 60% larger among students from less-educated homes, confirming worries about the uneven toll of the pandemic on children and families.) and negative health effects(Studies from Australia, Spain and China showed an increase in depressive symptoms and decrease in life satisfaction. A decrease in physical activity and increase in unhealthy food consumption were shown in studies from two countries. There was a decrease in the number of visits to the emergency department in four countries, an increase in child mortality in Cameroon and a decrease by over 50% of immunisations administered in Pakistan. A significant drop of 39% in child protection medical examination referrals during 2020 compared with the previous years was found in the UK, a decrease in allegations of child abuse and neglect by almost one-third due to school closures in Florida, and an increase in the number of children with physical child abuse trauma was found in one centre in the USA.).	pro	
lockdowns cause severe economic disruption(our estimates suggest that the lockdown reduces global output by about 33% at the peak of the lockdown, with the yearly impact being more than 9% of annual gdp.) and are unsustainable in the long term.	0_1.2.2.2.	Lockdowns cause severe economic disruption(Our estimates suggest that the lockdown reduces global output by about 33% at the peak of the lockdown, with the yearly impact being more than 9% of annual GDP.) and are unsustainable in the long term.	pro	Lockdowns in the UK alone cost more than £251 billion.	Measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19 resulted(The pandemic resulted in the permanent closure of roughly 200,000 U.S. establishments above historical levels during the first year of the viral outbreak, according to a study released Thursday by economists at the Fed.) in 200,000 businesses closing permanently in the US.
lockdowns in the uk alone cost more than £251 billion.	0_1.2.2.2.1.	Lockdowns in the UK alone cost more than £251 billion.	pro	
measures to prevent the spread of covid-19 resulted(the pandemic resulted in the permanent closure of roughly 200,000 u.s. establishments above historical levels during the first year of the viral outbreak, according to a study released thursday by economists at the fed.) in 200,000 businesses closing permanently in the us.	0_1.2.2.2.2.	Measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19 resulted(The pandemic resulted in the permanent closure of roughly 200,000 U.S. establishments above historical levels during the first year of the viral outbreak, according to a study released Thursday by economists at the Fed.) in 200,000 businesses closing permanently in the US.	pro	
lockdowns are unlikely to completely eradicate(“eradicating this virus right now from the world is a lot like trying to plan the construction of a stepping-stone pathway to the moon. it’s unrealistic,” says michael osterholm, an epidemiologist at the university of minnesota in minneapolis.) the virus, making it likely that the virus will reemerge after lockdowns end.	0_1.2.2.3.	Lockdowns are unlikely to completely eradicate(“Eradicating this virus right now from the world is a lot like trying to plan the construction of a stepping-stone pathway to the Moon. It’s unrealistic,” says Michael Osterholm, an epidemiologist at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.) the virus, making it likely that the virus will reemerge after lockdowns end.	pro	
the point of the global medical industry is to cure diseases. it is unclear why it should not attempt to cure covid-19 as well.	0_1.2.3.	The point of the global medical industry is to cure diseases. It is unclear why it should not attempt to cure Covid-19 as well.	pro	Advances in medical science and technology cured many deadly diseases throughout the 20th century, suggesting that Covid-19 can also be cured if we try.	Finding a cure for a disease can take a great deal of time, which we may not be able to afford during a pandemic.
advances in medical science and technology cured many deadly diseases throughout the 20th century, suggesting that covid-19 can also be cured if we try.	0_1.2.3.1.	Advances in medical science and technology cured many deadly diseases throughout the 20th century, suggesting that Covid-19 can also be cured if we try.	pro	
finding a cure for a disease can take a great deal of time, which we may not be able to afford during a pandemic.	0_1.2.3.2.	Finding a cure for a disease can take a great deal of time, which we may not be able to afford during a pandemic.	con	Pfizer is developing a pill that can treat Covid-19, and it is expected to be available by the end of 2021.	Attempts to develop a vaccine against HIV have been ongoing since the early 1980s, but have so far failed.
pfizer is developing a pill that can treat covid-19, and it is expected to be available by the end of 2021.	0_1.2.3.2.1.	Pfizer is developing a pill that can treat Covid-19, and it is expected to be available by the end of 2021.	pro	
attempts to develop a vaccine against hiv have been ongoing since the early 1980s, but have so far failed.	0_1.2.3.2.2.	Attempts to develop a vaccine against HIV have been ongoing since the early 1980s, but have so far failed.	con	
it is more realistic to keep using tested social distancing methods such as monitoring, testing, and contact tracing.	0_1.2.4.	It is more realistic to keep using tested social distancing methods such as monitoring, testing, and contact tracing.	con	With cheap, rapid antigen tests, mass testing to minimize the spread of the virus can be performed.	These methods require ongoing disruptions to normal life. A vaccine merely requires one or two trips to a vaccination center, which is much more convenient overall.	The success of social distancing methods relies on a lot of assumptions, which might not be true.	Social distancing and other recovery methods for Covid-19 do not provide immunity from the virus. Thus, we need something for the long run.	New Zealand was able to effectively fight the Covid-19 pandemic through strict monitoring and testing.
with cheap, rapid antigen tests, mass testing to minimize the spread of the virus can be performed.	0_1.2.4.1.	With cheap, rapid antigen tests, mass testing to minimize the spread of the virus can be performed.	con	Rapid test kits are less accurate than traditional PCR tests.	This is dependent on billions of people responsibly getting tested and the logistical support to make this possible, neither of which is realistic.
rapid test kits are less accurate than traditional pcr tests.	0_1.2.4.1.1.	Rapid test kits are less accurate than traditional PCR tests.	pro	
this is dependent on billions of people responsibly getting tested and the logistical support to make this possible, neither of which is realistic.	0_1.2.4.1.2.	This is dependent on billions of people responsibly getting tested and the logistical support to make this possible, neither of which is realistic.	pro	
these methods require ongoing disruptions to normal life. a vaccine merely requires one or two trips to a vaccination center, which is much more convenient overall.	0_1.2.4.2.	These methods require ongoing disruptions to normal life. A vaccine merely requires one or two trips to a vaccination center, which is much more convenient overall.	pro	Social distancing requires many businesses to operate at less than full capacity, which prohibits them from reaching their full economic potential.	Once an area's population reaches a sufficient vaccination level, Covid-19 restrictions like mask wearing and social distancing are often abandoned. This suggests that such restrictions are less convenient than vaccines.
social distancing requires many businesses to operate at less than full capacity, which prohibits them from reaching their full economic potential.	0_1.2.4.2.1.	Social distancing requires many businesses to operate at less than full capacity, which prohibits them from reaching their full economic potential.	pro	
once an area's population reaches a sufficient vaccination level, covid-19 restrictions like mask wearing and social distancing are often abandoned. this suggests that such restrictions are less convenient than vaccines.	0_1.2.4.2.2.	Once an area's population reaches a sufficient vaccination level, Covid-19 restrictions like mask wearing and social distancing are often abandoned. This suggests that such restrictions are less convenient than vaccines.	pro	
the success of social distancing methods relies on a lot of assumptions, which might not be true.	0_1.2.4.3.	The success of social distancing methods relies on a lot of assumptions, which might not be true.	pro	The biggest assumption with social distancing is that people will actually follow the guidelines, which has proven not to be the case in many instances.	Several studies have found(The team found that the control policies implemented in New York City reduced the number of infections by 72 percent and the number of deaths by 76 percent by the end of 2020.) that social distancing is effective at reducing the transmission of Covid-19.
the biggest assumption with social distancing is that people will actually follow the guidelines, which has proven not to be the case in many instances.	0_1.2.4.3.1.	The biggest assumption with social distancing is that people will actually follow the guidelines, which has proven not to be the case in many instances.	pro	
several studies have found(the team found that the control policies implemented in new york city reduced the number of infections by 72 percent and the number of deaths by 76 percent by the end of 2020.) that social distancing is effective at reducing the transmission of covid-19.	0_1.2.4.3.2.	Several studies have found(The team found that the control policies implemented in New York City reduced the number of infections by 72 percent and the number of deaths by 76 percent by the end of 2020.) that social distancing is effective at reducing the transmission of Covid-19.	con	
social distancing and other recovery methods for covid-19 do not provide immunity from the virus. thus, we need something for the long run.	0_1.2.4.4.	Social distancing and other recovery methods for Covid-19 do not provide immunity from the virus. Thus, we need something for the long run.	pro	
new zealand was able to effectively fight the covid-19 pandemic through strict monitoring and testing.	0_1.2.4.5.	New Zealand was able to effectively fight the Covid-19 pandemic through strict monitoring and testing.	con	While case numbers have remained very low, New Zealand has not completely eliminated Covid-19.	The success of New Zealand’s Covid-19 elimination strategy is unlikely to be replicated in other countries.
while case numbers have remained very low, new zealand has not completely eliminated covid-19.	0_1.2.4.5.1.	While case numbers have remained very low, New Zealand has not completely eliminated Covid-19.	pro	While Covid-19 has not been fully eliminated, case numbers are negligible. In late June 2021, only 2 cases of Covid-19 were documented in New Zealand.
while covid-19 has not been fully eliminated, case numbers are negligible. in late june 2021, only 2 cases of covid-19 were documented in new zealand.	0_1.2.4.5.1.1.	While Covid-19 has not been fully eliminated, case numbers are negligible. In late June 2021, only 2 cases of Covid-19 were documented in New Zealand.	con	
the success of new zealand’s covid-19 elimination strategy is unlikely to be replicated in other countries.	0_1.2.4.5.2.	The success of New Zealand’s Covid-19 elimination strategy is unlikely to be replicated in other countries.	pro	As an island nation, New Zealand can more effectively close its borders than countries with land crossings.	The population density of New Zealand, which is an essential factor influencing the spread of Covid-19, is extremely low compared to other countries.
as an island nation, new zealand can more effectively close its borders than countries with land crossings.	0_1.2.4.5.2.1.	As an island nation, New Zealand can more effectively close its borders than countries with land crossings.	pro	
the population density of new zealand, which is an essential factor influencing the spread of covid-19, is extremely low compared to other countries.	0_1.2.4.5.2.2.	The population density of New Zealand, which is an essential factor influencing the spread of Covid-19, is extremely low compared to other countries.	pro	Only 1.66 million people live in Auckland, the biggest city of New Zealand. Its population density is less than one-twentieth of New York City's population.
only 1.66 million people live in auckland, the biggest city of new zealand. its population density is less than one-twentieth of new york city's population.	0_1.2.4.5.2.2.1.	Only 1.66 million people live in Auckland, the biggest city of New Zealand. Its population density is less than one-twentieth of New York City's population.	pro	
other methods of containing covid-19 have not proven effective.	0_1.2.5.	Other methods of containing Covid-19 have not proven effective.	pro	
there are other medical alternatives to tackle the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.3.	There are other medical alternatives to tackle the Covid-19 pandemic.	con	Although there are medical alternatives to handling the symptoms of Covid-19, this does not prove that they are superior alternatives to vaccination.	A variety of medical cures were discussed for Covid-19 early in the pandemic.	Work is being done to create a pill that can treat Covid-19, and it is expected to yield results by the end of 2021.
although there are medical alternatives to handling the symptoms of covid-19, this does not prove that they are superior alternatives to vaccination.	0_1.3.1.	Although there are medical alternatives to handling the symptoms of Covid-19, this does not prove that they are superior alternatives to vaccination.	pro	Vaccines are a preemptive defense that can save people pain by ensuring that, if infected, they are able to fight off the virus without suffering any serious symptoms (p.1).	Alternative treatments could be superior to vaccines if vaccines are not widely available in a reasonable amount of time.
vaccines are a preemptive defense that can save people pain by ensuring that, if infected, they are able to fight off the virus without suffering any serious symptoms (p.1).	0_1.3.1.1.	Vaccines are a preemptive defense that can save people pain by ensuring that, if infected, they are able to fight off the virus without suffering any serious symptoms (p.1).	pro	
alternative treatments could be superior to vaccines if vaccines are not widely available in a reasonable amount of time.	0_1.3.1.2.	Alternative treatments could be superior to vaccines if vaccines are not widely available in a reasonable amount of time.	con	
a variety of medical cures were discussed for covid-19 early in the pandemic.	0_1.3.2.	A variety of medical cures were discussed for Covid-19 early in the pandemic.	con	Early in the pandemic, it was thought that sufficient vitamin D levels were associated with decreased risk for Covid-19 infection, lower ICU admissions, and mortality.	All of these supposed cures were later found to be ineffective, especially in comparison with the high levels of protection conferred on those who receive high-quality vaccines.	Early in the pandemic, plasma therapy showed favorable results to deal with severe cases of Covid-19.	Early in the pandemic, it was thought that some existing antivirals, such as remdesivir and chloroquine, could have had some useful effects against Covid-19.
early in the pandemic, it was thought that sufficient vitamin d levels were associated with decreased risk for covid-19 infection, lower icu admissions, and mortality.	0_1.3.2.1.	Early in the pandemic, it was thought that sufficient vitamin D levels were associated with decreased risk for Covid-19 infection, lower ICU admissions, and mortality.	con	Correlations between vitamin D and Covid-19 are tenuous at best and such studies often fail to uphold standards of scientific rigor.	Sufficient levels of vitamin D are merely one indication of having a healthy immune system, and it is in no way comparable to having a vaccine in terms of protection from Covid-19.
correlations between vitamin d and covid-19 are tenuous at best and such studies often fail to uphold standards of scientific rigor.	0_1.3.2.1.1.	Correlations between vitamin D and Covid-19 are tenuous at best and such studies often fail to uphold standards of scientific rigor.	pro	
sufficient levels of vitamin d are merely one indication of having a healthy immune system, and it is in no way comparable to having a vaccine in terms of protection from covid-19.	0_1.3.2.1.2.	Sufficient levels of vitamin D are merely one indication of having a healthy immune system, and it is in no way comparable to having a vaccine in terms of protection from Covid-19.	pro	
all of these supposed cures were later found to be ineffective, especially in comparison with the high levels of protection conferred on those who receive high-quality vaccines.	0_1.3.2.2.	All of these supposed cures were later found to be ineffective, especially in comparison with the high levels of protection conferred on those who receive high-quality vaccines.	pro	
early in the pandemic, plasma therapy showed favorable results to deal with severe cases of covid-19.	0_1.3.2.3.	Early in the pandemic, plasma therapy showed favorable results to deal with severe cases of Covid-19.	con	Official health organizations in the US do not recommend(Data from several other randomized clinical trials, all of which were underpowered, have not demonstrated the efficacy of convalescent plasma for the treatment of hospitalized patients with COVID-19.) using plasma therapy to treat Covid-19.	A large number of studies found no benefit to using plasma therapy to treat Covid-19.	In Pakistan, passive immunization using plasma therapy showed successful results in clinical trials.	India used plasma therapy to treat seriously infected Covid-19 patients, and the treatment initially showed successful results.	Plasma therapy or transfusion has medical risks and side effects(Immune-mediated reactions are most common--these include allergic and anaphylactic reactions, transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) and haemolysis. They can range in severity from mild to fatal.).
official health organizations in the us do not recommend(data from several other randomized clinical trials, all of which were underpowered, have not demonstrated the efficacy of convalescent plasma for the treatment of hospitalized patients with covid-19.) using plasma therapy to treat covid-19.	0_1.3.2.3.1.	Official health organizations in the US do not recommend(Data from several other randomized clinical trials, all of which were underpowered, have not demonstrated the efficacy of convalescent plasma for the treatment of hospitalized patients with COVID-19.) using plasma therapy to treat Covid-19.	pro	
a large number of studies found no benefit to using plasma therapy to treat covid-19.	0_1.3.2.3.2.	A large number of studies found no benefit to using plasma therapy to treat Covid-19.	pro	One trial that used plasma therapy to treat Covid-19 was called off after finding that there was no significant benefit to its use.
one trial that used plasma therapy to treat covid-19 was called off after finding that there was no significant benefit to its use.	0_1.3.2.3.2.1.	One trial that used plasma therapy to treat Covid-19 was called off after finding that there was no significant benefit to its use.	pro	
in pakistan, passive immunization using plasma therapy showed successful results in clinical trials.	0_1.3.2.3.3.	In Pakistan, passive immunization using plasma therapy showed successful results in clinical trials.	con	
india used plasma therapy to treat seriously infected covid-19 patients, and the treatment initially showed successful results.	0_1.3.2.3.4.	India used plasma therapy to treat seriously infected Covid-19 patients, and the treatment initially showed successful results.	con	India later dropped plasma therapy from its Covid-19 treatment guidelines after it was found to be ineffective.
india later dropped plasma therapy from its covid-19 treatment guidelines after it was found to be ineffective.	0_1.3.2.3.4.1.	India later dropped plasma therapy from its Covid-19 treatment guidelines after it was found to be ineffective.	pro	
plasma therapy or transfusion has medical risks and side effects(immune-mediated reactions are most common--these include allergic and anaphylactic reactions, transfusion-related acute lung injury (trali) and haemolysis. they can range in severity from mild to fatal.).	0_1.3.2.3.5.	Plasma therapy or transfusion has medical risks and side effects(Immune-mediated reactions are most common--these include allergic and anaphylactic reactions, transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) and haemolysis. They can range in severity from mild to fatal.).	pro	
early in the pandemic, it was thought that some existing antivirals, such as remdesivir and chloroquine, could have had some useful effects against covid-19.	0_1.3.2.4.	Early in the pandemic, it was thought that some existing antivirals, such as remdesivir and chloroquine, could have had some useful effects against Covid-19.	con	These drugs have limited efficacy and availability, and are not a substitute for vaccination.
these drugs have limited efficacy and availability, and are not a substitute for vaccination.	0_1.3.2.4.1.	These drugs have limited efficacy and availability, and are not a substitute for vaccination.	pro	Remdesivir is not recommended(Because both remdesivir formulations contain SBECD, patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of \<50 mL/min were excluded from some clinical trials of remdesivir; other trials had an eGFR cutoff of \<30 mL/min. Remdesivir is not recommended for patients with an eGFR \<30 mL/min due to lack of data.) for use in all Covid-19 patients due to potential adverse side effects.	As more studies were conducted, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine were found to be ineffective and health organizations advised against(The COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel (the Panel) recommends against the use of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine and/or azithromycin for the treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized patients (AI) and in nonhospitalized patients (AIIa).) their use.
remdesivir is not recommended(because both remdesivir formulations contain sbecd, patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (egfr) of \<50 ml/min were excluded from some clinical trials of remdesivir; other trials had an egfr cutoff of \<30 ml/min. remdesivir is not recommended for patients with an egfr \<30 ml/min due to lack of data.) for use in all covid-19 patients due to potential adverse side effects.	0_1.3.2.4.1.1.	Remdesivir is not recommended(Because both remdesivir formulations contain SBECD, patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of \<50 mL/min were excluded from some clinical trials of remdesivir; other trials had an eGFR cutoff of \<30 mL/min. Remdesivir is not recommended for patients with an eGFR \<30 mL/min due to lack of data.) for use in all Covid-19 patients due to potential adverse side effects.	pro	
as more studies were conducted, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine were found to be ineffective and health organizations advised against(the covid-19 treatment guidelines panel (the panel) recommends against the use of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine and/or azithromycin for the treatment of covid-19 in hospitalized patients (ai) and in nonhospitalized patients (aiia).) their use.	0_1.3.2.4.1.2.	As more studies were conducted, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine were found to be ineffective and health organizations advised against(The COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel (the Panel) recommends against the use of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine and/or azithromycin for the treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized patients (AI) and in nonhospitalized patients (AIIa).) their use.	pro	
work is being done to create a pill that can treat covid-19, and it is expected to yield results by the end of 2021.	0_1.3.3.	Work is being done to create a pill that can treat Covid-19, and it is expected to yield results by the end of 2021.	con	Pfizer is developing a pill that can treat Covid-19, and it is expected to be available by the end of 2021.	Several companies have joined the race to find a pill that will offer effective treatment for Covid-19. It is likely that at least one of these will be successful in the near term.	Assuming the successful development of a Covid-19 treatment, the same supply chain and distribution problems that hinder vaccine roll outs will affect pill roll outs, further lengthening the pandemic.	As of July 2021, a Japanese company, Shionogi & Co, has begun human trials for a pill that could treat Covid-19.
several companies have joined the race to find a pill that will offer effective treatment for covid-19. it is likely that at least one of these will be successful in the near term.	0_1.3.3.2.	Several companies have joined the race to find a pill that will offer effective treatment for Covid-19. It is likely that at least one of these will be successful in the near term.	con	
assuming the successful development of a covid-19 treatment, the same supply chain and distribution problems that hinder vaccine roll outs will affect pill roll outs, further lengthening the pandemic.	0_1.3.3.3.	Assuming the successful development of a Covid-19 treatment, the same supply chain and distribution problems that hinder vaccine roll outs will affect pill roll outs, further lengthening the pandemic.	pro	
as of july 2021, a japanese company, shionogi & co, has begun human trials for a pill that could treat covid-19.	0_1.3.3.4.	As of July 2021, a Japanese company, Shionogi & Co, has begun human trials for a pill that could treat Covid-19.	con	
we do need a vaccine for covid 19. we don’t have one yet.	0_1.4.	We do need a vaccine for Covid 19. We don’t have one yet.	pro	
vaccines will most effectively bring the pandemic under control, while also minimizing the possibility of a future outbreak of covid-19.	0_1.5.	Vaccines will most effectively bring the pandemic under control, while also minimizing the possibility of a future outbreak of Covid-19.	pro	Vaccine effectiveness is only as strong as vaccine rollout. However, it will be difficult to procure vaccines in suitable amounts.	Contracting and recovering from Covid-19 does not confer permanent immunity or protection onto the infected, making a vaccine even more important.	Vaccination is the safest and most effective way to achieve herd immunity.	Many people who have taken the Covid shot have contracted the virus.	The virus may mutate, making the vaccine redundant.
vaccine effectiveness is only as strong as vaccine rollout. however, it will be difficult to procure vaccines in suitable amounts.	0_1.5.1.	Vaccine effectiveness is only as strong as vaccine rollout. However, it will be difficult to procure vaccines in suitable amounts.	con	Many different technologies are being simultaneously utilized to produce a variety of vaccines, which will help close the shortfall in supply.	Many developing countries will not have full access to vaccines until at least 2023.	In just six months (by July 2021), over a quarter of the world's population had received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine.	This difficulty should not be reason enough to abandon vaccines altogether, but to make an effort to overcome the challenges associated with procurement.	COVAX, which was designed to provide equitable access to vaccines, has failed(The COVAX programme is far short of its target of delivering 2 billion doses by the end of the year, but does expect a big increase in supplies by early 2022, and wants to make sure that those, at least, reach the countries in direst need.) to meet its targets for vaccine distribution.	Vaccine production is currently insufficient for global inoculation against Covid-19, and will likely remain insufficient for the next couple of years.
many different technologies are being simultaneously utilized to produce a variety of vaccines, which will help close the shortfall in supply.	0_1.5.1.1.	Many different technologies are being simultaneously utilized to produce a variety of vaccines, which will help close the shortfall in supply.	pro	Pfizer-BioNTech is a highly effective, mRNA vaccine that is delivered in two doses.	The Johnson & Johnson vaccine is a single-dose vaccine that uses an adenovirus that is modified to engender an antibody response in humans.
pfizer-biontech is a highly effective, mrna vaccine that is delivered in two doses.	0_1.5.1.1.1.	Pfizer-BioNTech is a highly effective, mRNA vaccine that is delivered in two doses.	pro	
the johnson & johnson vaccine is a single-dose vaccine that uses an adenovirus that is modified to engender an antibody response in humans.	0_1.5.1.1.2.	The Johnson & Johnson vaccine is a single-dose vaccine that uses an adenovirus that is modified to engender an antibody response in humans.	pro	
many developing countries will not have full access to vaccines until at least 2023.	0_1.5.1.2.	Many developing countries will not have full access to vaccines until at least 2023.	con	After just 42 days, the COVAX distributed vaccines had reached over 100 countries, indicating that all countries should have access to a vaccine within a reasonable amount of time.	Sub-Saharan Africa lacks the resources to procure and distribute vaccines without large-scale international aid.	Rich countries have been accused of deliberately restricting poor countries' access to vaccines.	In March 2021, rich nations were able to vaccinate one person every second, while the poorest nations were struggling to procure vaccine doses.	One nation becoming better off by a vaccine does not mean another nation will be worse off than if nothing was done.
after just 42 days, the covax distributed vaccines had reached over 100 countries, indicating that all countries should have access to a vaccine within a reasonable amount of time.	0_1.5.1.2.1.	After just 42 days, the COVAX distributed vaccines had reached over 100 countries, indicating that all countries should have access to a vaccine within a reasonable amount of time.	pro	
sub-saharan africa lacks the resources to procure and distribute vaccines without large-scale international aid.	0_1.5.1.2.2.	Sub-Saharan Africa lacks the resources to procure and distribute vaccines without large-scale international aid.	con	Some African countries are already suffering from shortages(Many African countries followed advice from the WHO to administer as many first doses as possible and not stockpile vaccines for second doses...These factors have contributed to a major shortage of doses for second jabs, principally of the AstraZeneca vaccine.) after failing to receive the second doses for some vaccines.	It is estimated that many African countries will not be able to reach their goal(But only about 1 percent of Africans have been fully vaccinated. And even the African Union’s modest goal of getting 20 percent of the population vaccinated by the end of 2021 seems out of reach.) of 20% vaccination by the end of 2021.	Wealthy nations have the ability to provide international aid if there is the will to do so.
some african countries are already suffering from shortages(many african countries followed advice from the who to administer as many first doses as possible and not stockpile vaccines for second doses...these factors have contributed to a major shortage of doses for second jabs, principally of the astrazeneca vaccine.) after failing to receive the second doses for some vaccines.	0_1.5.1.2.2.1.	Some African countries are already suffering from shortages(Many African countries followed advice from the WHO to administer as many first doses as possible and not stockpile vaccines for second doses...These factors have contributed to a major shortage of doses for second jabs, principally of the AstraZeneca vaccine.) after failing to receive the second doses for some vaccines.	con	
it is estimated that many african countries will not be able to reach their goal(but only about 1 percent of africans have been fully vaccinated. and even the african union’s modest goal of getting 20 percent of the population vaccinated by the end of 2021 seems out of reach.) of 20% vaccination by the end of 2021.	0_1.5.1.2.2.2.	It is estimated that many African countries will not be able to reach their goal(But only about 1 percent of Africans have been fully vaccinated. And even the African Union’s modest goal of getting 20 percent of the population vaccinated by the end of 2021 seems out of reach.) of 20% vaccination by the end of 2021.	con	
wealthy nations have the ability to provide international aid if there is the will to do so.	0_1.5.1.2.2.3.	Wealthy nations have the ability to provide international aid if there is the will to do so.	pro	
rich countries have been accused of deliberately restricting poor countries' access to vaccines.	0_1.5.1.2.3.	Rich countries have been accused of deliberately restricting poor countries' access to vaccines.	con	
in march 2021, rich nations were able to vaccinate one person every second, while the poorest nations were struggling to procure vaccine doses.	0_1.5.1.2.4.	In March 2021, rich nations were able to vaccinate one person every second, while the poorest nations were struggling to procure vaccine doses.	pro	
one nation becoming better off by a vaccine does not mean another nation will be worse off than if nothing was done.	0_1.5.1.2.5.	One nation becoming better off by a vaccine does not mean another nation will be worse off than if nothing was done.	pro	
in just six months (by july 2021), over a quarter of the world's population had received at least one dose of the covid-19 vaccine.	0_1.5.1.3.	In just six months (by July 2021), over a quarter of the world's population had received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine.	pro	The majority of these vaccinations were concentrated in a small number of wealthy countries, where distribution is easier than in developing nations. It is possible that the pace will slow down when attempting to vaccinate places with poorer infrastructure.
the majority of these vaccinations were concentrated in a small number of wealthy countries, where distribution is easier than in developing nations. it is possible that the pace will slow down when attempting to vaccinate places with poorer infrastructure.	0_1.5.1.3.1.	The majority of these vaccinations were concentrated in a small number of wealthy countries, where distribution is easier than in developing nations. It is possible that the pace will slow down when attempting to vaccinate places with poorer infrastructure.	con	
this difficulty should not be reason enough to abandon vaccines altogether, but to make an effort to overcome the challenges associated with procurement.	0_1.5.1.4.	This difficulty should not be reason enough to abandon vaccines altogether, but to make an effort to overcome the challenges associated with procurement.	pro	Several successful vaccination drives throughout history were the result of prolonged effort and determination.
several successful vaccination drives throughout history were the result of prolonged effort and determination.	0_1.5.1.4.1.	Several successful vaccination drives throughout history were the result of prolonged effort and determination.	pro	
covax, which was designed to provide equitable access to vaccines, has failed(the covax programme is far short of its target of delivering 2 billion doses by the end of the year, but does expect a big increase in supplies by early 2022, and wants to make sure that those, at least, reach the countries in direst need.) to meet its targets for vaccine distribution.	0_1.5.1.5.	COVAX, which was designed to provide equitable access to vaccines, has failed(The COVAX programme is far short of its target of delivering 2 billion doses by the end of the year, but does expect a big increase in supplies by early 2022, and wants to make sure that those, at least, reach the countries in direst need.) to meet its targets for vaccine distribution.	con	These setbacks are likely temporary and will be alleviated over time if there is the will to fix them.	While G7 countries have pledged to send 1bn vaccine doses, this is far lower than the number (11 bn) that the WHO has estimated is needed.
these setbacks are likely temporary and will be alleviated over time if there is the will to fix them.	0_1.5.1.5.1.	These setbacks are likely temporary and will be alleviated over time if there is the will to fix them.	pro	The US recently pledged to donate excess vaccines to developing countries.
the us recently pledged to donate excess vaccines to developing countries.	0_1.5.1.5.1.1.	The US recently pledged to donate excess vaccines to developing countries.	pro	
while g7 countries have pledged to send 1bn vaccine doses, this is far lower than the number (11 bn) that the who has estimated is needed.	0_1.5.1.5.2.	While G7 countries have pledged to send 1bn vaccine doses, this is far lower than the number (11 bn) that the WHO has estimated is needed.	con	
vaccine production is currently insufficient for global inoculation against covid-19, and will likely remain insufficient for the next couple of years.	0_1.5.1.6.	Vaccine production is currently insufficient for global inoculation against Covid-19, and will likely remain insufficient for the next couple of years.	con	Some estimates suggest(A larger figure was published last week in an analysis from the Global Health Innovation Center at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina. The centre’s researchers aggregated publicly announced forecasts from vaccine makers, which add up to around 12 billion doses by the end of the year.) that vaccine manufacturers will be able to produce 12 billion doses by the end of 2021.	Major vaccine manufacturers have stated that sufficient vaccines will not be produced to inoculate the entire world until the end of 2024.
some estimates suggest(a larger figure was published last week in an analysis from the global health innovation center at duke university in durham, north carolina. the centre’s researchers aggregated publicly announced forecasts from vaccine makers, which add up to around 12 billion doses by the end of the year.) that vaccine manufacturers will be able to produce 12 billion doses by the end of 2021.	0_1.5.1.6.1.	Some estimates suggest(A larger figure was published last week in an analysis from the Global Health Innovation Center at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina. The centre’s researchers aggregated publicly announced forecasts from vaccine makers, which add up to around 12 billion doses by the end of the year.) that vaccine manufacturers will be able to produce 12 billion doses by the end of 2021.	pro	Even if vaccines are produced in sufficient amounts, problems with supply chains and distribution will likely persist for several years.	Global vaccine manufacturing capabilities are rapidly increasing(According to the report, commercial vaccine contract manufacturing accounted for over 64 percent of the market in 2020, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The clinical vaccine contract manufacturing market is expected to experience an absolute growth of over 113 percent and an incremental growth of over $492 million over the forecast period.) as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic.
even if vaccines are produced in sufficient amounts, problems with supply chains and distribution will likely persist for several years.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.	Even if vaccines are produced in sufficient amounts, problems with supply chains and distribution will likely persist for several years.	con	The transportation of vaccines that have to be stored at -70C is extremely difficult to do on a large scale.	Some experts worry that a shortage of qualified staff at production facilities could prolong the vaccine rollout.	Measures are already being put in place to improve the vaccine supply chain.
the transportation of vaccines that have to be stored at -70c is extremely difficult to do on a large scale.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.1.	The transportation of vaccines that have to be stored at -70C is extremely difficult to do on a large scale.	con	Once thawed, the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines must be administered(According to the CDC, both the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines take a few hours to thaw and must be administered quickly once they are no longer being refrigerated. The Pfizer vaccine is only stable for six hours at room temperature. A punctured Moderna vaccine vial is viable for up to 12 hours, the CDC says.) within hours, making it probable that many of these vaccines will be wasted if people do not show up at their appointed time.	Not all vaccines have to be stored at such cold temperatures. Many can be stored under standard storage conditions.
once thawed, the pfizer and moderna vaccines must be administered(according to the cdc, both the pfizer and moderna vaccines take a few hours to thaw and must be administered quickly once they are no longer being refrigerated. the pfizer vaccine is only stable for six hours at room temperature. a punctured moderna vaccine vial is viable for up to 12 hours, the cdc says.) within hours, making it probable that many of these vaccines will be wasted if people do not show up at their appointed time.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.1.1.	Once thawed, the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines must be administered(According to the CDC, both the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines take a few hours to thaw and must be administered quickly once they are no longer being refrigerated. The Pfizer vaccine is only stable for six hours at room temperature. A punctured Moderna vaccine vial is viable for up to 12 hours, the CDC says.) within hours, making it probable that many of these vaccines will be wasted if people do not show up at their appointed time.	con	Places like South Korea have tried to alleviate these problems by developing an app that people can use to sign up for "no show" vaccines in their area.	The WHO has reported that, even in standard circumstances, 50% of vaccines go to waste because of improper storage conditions. This number is likely to be worsened due to the immense pressure of unloading a larger quantity of vaccines in a shorter amount of time than usual.	The short half-life of the vaccines has compelled many healthcare workers to throw away thousands of vaccines that are left over at the end of the day.
places like south korea have tried to alleviate these problems by developing an app that people can use to sign up for "no show" vaccines in their area.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.1.1.1.	Places like South Korea have tried to alleviate these problems by developing an app that people can use to sign up for "no show" vaccines in their area.	pro	
the who has reported that, even in standard circumstances, 50% of vaccines go to waste because of improper storage conditions. this number is likely to be worsened due to the immense pressure of unloading a larger quantity of vaccines in a shorter amount of time than usual.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.1.1.2.	The WHO has reported that, even in standard circumstances, 50% of vaccines go to waste because of improper storage conditions. This number is likely to be worsened due to the immense pressure of unloading a larger quantity of vaccines in a shorter amount of time than usual.	con	
the short half-life of the vaccines has compelled many healthcare workers to throw away thousands of vaccines that are left over at the end of the day.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.1.1.3.	The short half-life of the vaccines has compelled many healthcare workers to throw away thousands of vaccines that are left over at the end of the day.	con	
not all vaccines have to be stored at such cold temperatures. many can be stored under standard storage conditions.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.1.2.	Not all vaccines have to be stored at such cold temperatures. Many can be stored under standard storage conditions.	pro	
some experts worry that a shortage of qualified staff at production facilities could prolong the vaccine rollout.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.2.	Some experts worry that a shortage of qualified staff at production facilities could prolong the vaccine rollout.	con	Some educational institutions are already changing their curriculum to better prepare people to enter the vaccine manufacturing workforce.	There are some programs available(The training consisted of a three-week industry-focused course for participants from institutions supported by the BARDA and WHO influenza vaccine production capacity building program. The curriculum was divided into six components: (1) biosafety, (2) cell culture and growth of cells in bioreactors, (3) virus assays and inactivation, (4) scale-up strategies, (5) downstream processing, and (6) egg- and cell-based vaccine production and cGMP.) that provide vaccine manufacturing training in just three weeks.	Popular job searching websites show hundreds or thousands of open positions in the vaccine manufacturing field.
some educational institutions are already changing their curriculum to better prepare people to enter the vaccine manufacturing workforce.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.2.1.	Some educational institutions are already changing their curriculum to better prepare people to enter the vaccine manufacturing workforce.	pro	
there are some programs available(the training consisted of a three-week industry-focused course for participants from institutions supported by the barda and who influenza vaccine production capacity building program. the curriculum was divided into six components: (1) biosafety, (2) cell culture and growth of cells in bioreactors, (3) virus assays and inactivation, (4) scale-up strategies, (5) downstream processing, and (6) egg- and cell-based vaccine production and cgmp.) that provide vaccine manufacturing training in just three weeks.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.2.2.	There are some programs available(The training consisted of a three-week industry-focused course for participants from institutions supported by the BARDA and WHO influenza vaccine production capacity building program. The curriculum was divided into six components: (1) biosafety, (2) cell culture and growth of cells in bioreactors, (3) virus assays and inactivation, (4) scale-up strategies, (5) downstream processing, and (6) egg- and cell-based vaccine production and cGMP.) that provide vaccine manufacturing training in just three weeks.	pro	
popular job searching websites show hundreds or thousands of open positions in the vaccine manufacturing field.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.2.3.	Popular job searching websites show hundreds or thousands of open positions in the vaccine manufacturing field.	con	
measures are already being put in place to improve the vaccine supply chain.	0_1.5.1.6.1.1.3.	Measures are already being put in place to improve the vaccine supply chain.	pro	
global vaccine manufacturing capabilities are rapidly increasing(according to the report, commercial vaccine contract manufacturing accounted for over 64 percent of the market in 2020, primarily as a result of the covid-19 pandemic. the clinical vaccine contract manufacturing market is expected to experience an absolute growth of over 113 percent and an incremental growth of over $492 million over the forecast period.) as a result of the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.5.1.6.1.2.	Global vaccine manufacturing capabilities are rapidly increasing(According to the report, commercial vaccine contract manufacturing accounted for over 64 percent of the market in 2020, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The clinical vaccine contract manufacturing market is expected to experience an absolute growth of over 113 percent and an incremental growth of over $492 million over the forecast period.) as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	New vaccine manufacturing hubs, such as in South Korea, are in the process of being created.	The scale and pace at which vaccines are being produced is unprecedented in medical history.	This figure does not account for political delays, such as export controls and foreign policy concerns, that may delay or divert vaccine deployment.
new vaccine manufacturing hubs, such as in south korea, are in the process of being created.	0_1.5.1.6.1.2.1.	New vaccine manufacturing hubs, such as in South Korea, are in the process of being created.	pro	
the scale and pace at which vaccines are being produced is unprecedented in medical history.	0_1.5.1.6.1.2.2.	The scale and pace at which vaccines are being produced is unprecedented in medical history.	pro	
this figure does not account for political delays, such as export controls and foreign policy concerns, that may delay or divert vaccine deployment.	0_1.5.1.6.1.2.3.	This figure does not account for political delays, such as export controls and foreign policy concerns, that may delay or divert vaccine deployment.	con	
major vaccine manufacturers have stated that sufficient vaccines will not be produced to inoculate the entire world until the end of 2024.	0_1.5.1.6.2.	Major vaccine manufacturers have stated that sufficient vaccines will not be produced to inoculate the entire world until the end of 2024.	con	
contracting and recovering from covid-19 does not confer permanent immunity or protection onto the infected, making a vaccine even more important.	0_1.5.2.	Contracting and recovering from Covid-19 does not confer permanent immunity or protection onto the infected, making a vaccine even more important.	pro	A vaccine will only confer a similar degree of immunity or protection as primary infection itself would.	The vaccine might not be needed for those who have already been sick of COVID-19. If it is proven that previously infected people transmit the virus equally or less than vaccinated people, we might not need to vaccinate those who can prove they've been infected already.	There have been instances of reinfection among those who have fully recovered from Covid-19.	Some studies showed that many Covid-19 recovered patients lost their immunity within, at worst, a few weeks and at best, a few months.
a vaccine will only confer a similar degree of immunity or protection as primary infection itself would.	0_1.5.2.1.	A vaccine will only confer a similar degree of immunity or protection as primary infection itself would.	con	The immunity conferred by vaccines can be supplemented(The response to a booster dose is characterized by a shorter lag period and is also prompt, powerful, and prolonged—producing antibodies which last for longer periods with high avidity (capacity to bind to antigen is high). Both IgM and IgG antibodies are produced due to collaboration between B cells and T cells. This accelerated response is attributed to immunological memory and forms the basis of vaccination and revaccination.) by booster doses, which can ensure that antibodies persist for longer and have a higher affinity for binding to antigens.	According to data obtained from Israel, there are early signs that the protection conferred by vaccines might wane after some time, making people once more susceptible to Covid-19.	Many experts have argued that vaccination offers significantly more protection against Covid-19 than natural infection.
the immunity conferred by vaccines can be supplemented(the response to a booster dose is characterized by a shorter lag period and is also prompt, powerful, and prolonged—producing antibodies which last for longer periods with high avidity (capacity to bind to antigen is high). both igm and igg antibodies are produced due to collaboration between b cells and t cells. this accelerated response is attributed to immunological memory and forms the basis of vaccination and revaccination.) by booster doses, which can ensure that antibodies persist for longer and have a higher affinity for binding to antigens.	0_1.5.2.1.1.	The immunity conferred by vaccines can be supplemented(The response to a booster dose is characterized by a shorter lag period and is also prompt, powerful, and prolonged—producing antibodies which last for longer periods with high avidity (capacity to bind to antigen is high). Both IgM and IgG antibodies are produced due to collaboration between B cells and T cells. This accelerated response is attributed to immunological memory and forms the basis of vaccination and revaccination.) by booster doses, which can ensure that antibodies persist for longer and have a higher affinity for binding to antigens.	pro	Pfizer is attempting to obtain authorization for booster shots, after having obtained data that a third dose would strongly boost protection.
pfizer is attempting to obtain authorization for booster shots, after having obtained data that a third dose would strongly boost protection.	0_1.5.2.1.1.1.	Pfizer is attempting to obtain authorization for booster shots, after having obtained data that a third dose would strongly boost protection.	pro	
according to data obtained from israel, there are early signs that the protection conferred by vaccines might wane after some time, making people once more susceptible to covid-19.	0_1.5.2.1.2.	According to data obtained from Israel, there are early signs that the protection conferred by vaccines might wane after some time, making people once more susceptible to Covid-19.	con	Until this has been confirmed, it is dangerous to pursue a "third dose" policy.	Health experts in Israel emphasized(However, some experts working with the Health Ministry cautioned that it was too early to draw conclusions, since the sample size was too small and those who were vaccinated first are mostly the elderly, who have a weaker immune system to begin with.) that this result is inconclusive.
until this has been confirmed, it is dangerous to pursue a "third dose" policy.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.	Until this has been confirmed, it is dangerous to pursue a "third dose" policy.	pro	A third dose may have more dangerous or severe side effects than either the first or second dose.	A third dose will divert much needed vaccines from the developing world.	It is best to be prepared for this outcome, so that action can be taken quickly and decisively if this hypothesis is confirmed.
a third dose may have more dangerous or severe side effects than either the first or second dose.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.1.	A third dose may have more dangerous or severe side effects than either the first or second dose.	pro	
a third dose will divert much needed vaccines from the developing world.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.2.	A third dose will divert much needed vaccines from the developing world.	pro	If the developing world population is not vaccinated, SARS-CoV-2 will continue to mutate into more transmissible and severe strains, which puts the entire global community at risk.	In July 2021, Israel offered the option of a third dose of Pfizer to adult citizens with weak immune systems.
if the developing world population is not vaccinated, sars-cov-2 will continue to mutate into more transmissible and severe strains, which puts the entire global community at risk.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.2.1.	If the developing world population is not vaccinated, SARS-CoV-2 will continue to mutate into more transmissible and severe strains, which puts the entire global community at risk.	pro	
in july 2021, israel offered the option of a third dose of pfizer to adult citizens with weak immune systems.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.2.2.	In July 2021, Israel offered the option of a third dose of Pfizer to adult citizens with weak immune systems.	pro	
it is best to be prepared for this outcome, so that action can be taken quickly and decisively if this hypothesis is confirmed.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.3.	It is best to be prepared for this outcome, so that action can be taken quickly and decisively if this hypothesis is confirmed.	con	The UK has decided to trial the third dose, making it all the more important for the logistics to be sorted out.	The AMA has had a provisional code in place since April 2021 in case the FDA or CDC approve the third vaccine dose.
the uk has decided to trial the third dose, making it all the more important for the logistics to be sorted out.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.3.1.	The UK has decided to trial the third dose, making it all the more important for the logistics to be sorted out.	con	The NHS is preparing booster jabs for individuals above the age of 50 before the onset of winter 2021.
the nhs is preparing booster jabs for individuals above the age of 50 before the onset of winter 2021.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.3.1.1.	The NHS is preparing booster jabs for individuals above the age of 50 before the onset of winter 2021.	con	
the ama has had a provisional code in place since april 2021 in case the fda or cdc approve the third vaccine dose.	0_1.5.2.1.2.1.3.2.	The AMA has had a provisional code in place since April 2021 in case the FDA or CDC approve the third vaccine dose.	con	
health experts in israel emphasized(however, some experts working with the health ministry cautioned that it was too early to draw conclusions, since the sample size was too small and those who were vaccinated first are mostly the elderly, who have a weaker immune system to begin with.) that this result is inconclusive.	0_1.5.2.1.2.2.	Health experts in Israel emphasized(However, some experts working with the Health Ministry cautioned that it was too early to draw conclusions, since the sample size was too small and those who were vaccinated first are mostly the elderly, who have a weaker immune system to begin with.) that this result is inconclusive.	pro	
many experts have argued that vaccination offers significantly more protection against covid-19 than natural infection.	0_1.5.2.1.3.	Many experts have argued that vaccination offers significantly more protection against Covid-19 than natural infection.	pro	
the vaccine might not be needed for those who have already been sick of covid-19. if it is proven that previously infected people transmit the virus equally or less than vaccinated people, we might not need to vaccinate those who can prove they've been infected already.	0_1.5.2.2.	The vaccine might not be needed for those who have already been sick of COVID-19. If it is proven that previously infected people transmit the virus equally or less than vaccinated people, we might not need to vaccinate those who can prove they've been infected already.	con	
there have been instances of reinfection among those who have fully recovered from covid-19.	0_1.5.2.3.	There have been instances of reinfection among those who have fully recovered from Covid-19.	pro	One study found that reinfection rates are less than 1% for those with severe Covid-19 symptoms.	Reinfection rates seem to be correlated(But people with asthma or a nicotine dependence faced a nearly two and three times higher risk of COVID-19 reinfection, respectively. What’s more, nonwhite patients, particularly Black and Hispanic people, were about two times more likely to be reinfected.) with specific risk factors in certain populations.	There might be other explanations for fully recovered patients testing positive for Covid-19 again.
one study found that reinfection rates are less than 1% for those with severe covid-19 symptoms.	0_1.5.2.3.1.	One study found that reinfection rates are less than 1% for those with severe Covid-19 symptoms.	con	
reinfection rates seem to be correlated(but people with asthma or a nicotine dependence faced a nearly two and three times higher risk of covid-19 reinfection, respectively. what’s more, nonwhite patients, particularly black and hispanic people, were about two times more likely to be reinfected.) with specific risk factors in certain populations.	0_1.5.2.3.2.	Reinfection rates seem to be correlated(But people with asthma or a nicotine dependence faced a nearly two and three times higher risk of COVID-19 reinfection, respectively. What’s more, nonwhite patients, particularly Black and Hispanic people, were about two times more likely to be reinfected.) with specific risk factors in certain populations.	pro	
there might be other explanations for fully recovered patients testing positive for covid-19 again.	0_1.5.2.3.3.	There might be other explanations for fully recovered patients testing positive for Covid-19 again.	con	
some studies showed that many covid-19 recovered patients lost their immunity within, at worst, a few weeks and at best, a few months.	0_1.5.2.4.	Some studies showed that many Covid-19 recovered patients lost their immunity within, at worst, a few weeks and at best, a few months.	pro	Studies have found that Covid-19 recovered patients usually have immunity for about 8 months and potentially even longer.
studies have found that covid-19 recovered patients usually have immunity for about 8 months and potentially even longer.	0_1.5.2.4.1.	Studies have found that Covid-19 recovered patients usually have immunity for about 8 months and potentially even longer.	con	A study(95% of individuals were still positive for at least three out of five SARS-CoV-2 immune memory responses) found that while each component of the immune memory response to SARS-CoV-2 had different kinetics, 95% of Covid-19 recovered patients were positive for three of the five SARS-CoV-2 memory responses 8 months post-recovery.	Even most individuals who recover from a mild case of Covid-19 produce antibodies(Neutralizing and spike-specific antibody production persists for at least 5–7 months) for at least 5 to 7 months, potentially even longer.	Until there is sufficient evidence to prove that immunity lasts more permanently, vaccines remain the safest option.
a study(95% of individuals were still positive for at least three out of five sars-cov-2 immune memory responses) found that while each component of the immune memory response to sars-cov-2 had different kinetics, 95% of covid-19 recovered patients were positive for three of the five sars-cov-2 memory responses 8 months post-recovery.	0_1.5.2.4.1.1.	A study(95% of individuals were still positive for at least three out of five SARS-CoV-2 immune memory responses) found that while each component of the immune memory response to SARS-CoV-2 had different kinetics, 95% of Covid-19 recovered patients were positive for three of the five SARS-CoV-2 memory responses 8 months post-recovery.	con	These can at least blunt the effect(resting immune memory compartments can potentially contribute in meaningful ways to protective immunity against pneumonia or severe secondary COVID-19. The presence of sub-sterilizing neutralizing antibody titers at the time of SARS-CoV-2 exposure would blunt the size of the initial infection, and may provide an added contribution to limiting COVID-19 severity, based on observations of protective immunity for other human respiratory viral infections) of a secondary infection, so that in the majority of cases, it is harmless.
these can at least blunt the effect(resting immune memory compartments can potentially contribute in meaningful ways to protective immunity against pneumonia or severe secondary covid-19. the presence of sub-sterilizing neutralizing antibody titers at the time of sars-cov-2 exposure would blunt the size of the initial infection, and may provide an added contribution to limiting covid-19 severity, based on observations of protective immunity for other human respiratory viral infections) of a secondary infection, so that in the majority of cases, it is harmless.	0_1.5.2.4.1.1.1.	These can at least blunt the effect(resting immune memory compartments can potentially contribute in meaningful ways to protective immunity against pneumonia or severe secondary COVID-19. The presence of sub-sterilizing neutralizing antibody titers at the time of SARS-CoV-2 exposure would blunt the size of the initial infection, and may provide an added contribution to limiting COVID-19 severity, based on observations of protective immunity for other human respiratory viral infections) of a secondary infection, so that in the majority of cases, it is harmless.	con	
even most individuals who recover from a mild case of covid-19 produce antibodies(neutralizing and spike-specific antibody production persists for at least 5–7 months) for at least 5 to 7 months, potentially even longer.	0_1.5.2.4.1.2.	Even most individuals who recover from a mild case of Covid-19 produce antibodies(Neutralizing and spike-specific antibody production persists for at least 5–7 months) for at least 5 to 7 months, potentially even longer.	con	
until there is sufficient evidence to prove that immunity lasts more permanently, vaccines remain the safest option.	0_1.5.2.4.1.3.	Until there is sufficient evidence to prove that immunity lasts more permanently, vaccines remain the safest option.	pro	
vaccination is the safest and most effective way to achieve herd immunity.	0_1.5.3.	Vaccination is the safest and most effective way to achieve herd immunity.	pro	The concept of 'herd immunity' is considered a flawed approach to tackling the Covid-19 pandemic.	Vaccinated individuals do not transmit Covid-19 to others.	Herd immunity protects groups in the community who are particularly vulnerable to diseases, but often cannot safely receive vaccines.	COVID-19 is 99% survivable therefore only high risk people need a vaccine.
the concept of 'herd immunity' is considered a flawed approach to tackling the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.5.3.1.	The concept of 'herd immunity' is considered a flawed approach to tackling the Covid-19 pandemic.	con	Herd immunity is likely to be unattainable for many countries over the long term.	Herd immunity does not give a high level of individual protection to a person.	This is only true in the case of Covid-19 being allowed to spread naturally among people to infect and confer immunity upon them - vaccinations are a safer route to an end goal (herd immunity) that would be considered a successful outcome.
herd immunity is likely to be unattainable for many countries over the long term.	0_1.5.3.1.1.	Herd immunity is likely to be unattainable for many countries over the long term.	con	Factors such as vaccine hesitancy, new SARS-CoV-2 variants, and the delayed arrival of vaccination for children significantly reduce the possibility of achieving herd immunity in the near future.
factors such as vaccine hesitancy, new sars-cov-2 variants, and the delayed arrival of vaccination for children significantly reduce the possibility of achieving herd immunity in the near future.	0_1.5.3.1.1.1.	Factors such as vaccine hesitancy, new SARS-CoV-2 variants, and the delayed arrival of vaccination for children significantly reduce the possibility of achieving herd immunity in the near future.	con	
herd immunity does not give a high level of individual protection to a person.	0_1.5.3.1.2.	Herd immunity does not give a high level of individual protection to a person.	con	
this is only true in the case of covid-19 being allowed to spread naturally among people to infect and confer immunity upon them - vaccinations are a safer route to an end goal (herd immunity) that would be considered a successful outcome.	0_1.5.3.1.3.	This is only true in the case of Covid-19 being allowed to spread naturally among people to infect and confer immunity upon them - vaccinations are a safer route to an end goal (herd immunity) that would be considered a successful outcome.	pro	Through herd immunity, members of the population who have not been vaccinated are also protected.
through herd immunity, members of the population who have not been vaccinated are also protected.	0_1.5.3.1.3.1.	Through herd immunity, members of the population who have not been vaccinated are also protected.	pro	
vaccinated individuals do not transmit covid-19 to others.	0_1.5.3.2.	Vaccinated individuals do not transmit Covid-19 to others.	pro	In April 2021, Public Health England showed that those who were vaccinated were half as likely to transmit Covid-19 than those who were not.	While the rate of Covid-19 transmission has been shown to decrease among vaccinated individuals, it still remains possible.
in april 2021, public health england showed that those who were vaccinated were half as likely to transmit covid-19 than those who were not.	0_1.5.3.2.1.	In April 2021, Public Health England showed that those who were vaccinated were half as likely to transmit Covid-19 than those who were not.	pro	
while the rate of covid-19 transmission has been shown to decrease among vaccinated individuals, it still remains possible.	0_1.5.3.2.2.	While the rate of Covid-19 transmission has been shown to decrease among vaccinated individuals, it still remains possible.	con	
herd immunity protects groups in the community who are particularly vulnerable to diseases, but often cannot safely receive vaccines.	0_1.5.3.3.	Herd immunity protects groups in the community who are particularly vulnerable to diseases, but often cannot safely receive vaccines.	pro	
covid-19 is 99% survivable therefore only high risk people need a vaccine.	0_1.5.3.4.	COVID-19 is 99% survivable therefore only high risk people need a vaccine.	con	
many people who have taken the covid shot have contracted the virus.	0_1.5.4.	Many people who have taken the Covid shot have contracted the virus.	con	These breakthrough cases only comprise 0.08% of fully vaccinated people in the US.
these breakthrough cases only comprise 0.08% of fully vaccinated people in the us.	0_1.5.4.1.	These breakthrough cases only comprise 0.08% of fully vaccinated people in the US.	pro	The fact that any “vaccinated” people still contracted the virus is evidence hat it is not a vaccine rather a Covid shot, much like the flu shot. Vaccines prevent infection.
the fact that any “vaccinated” people still contracted the virus is evidence hat it is not a vaccine rather a covid shot, much like the flu shot. vaccines prevent infection.	0_1.5.4.1.1.	The fact that any “vaccinated” people still contracted the virus is evidence hat it is not a vaccine rather a Covid shot, much like the flu shot. Vaccines prevent infection.	pro	Vaccines are not 100% effective at preventing infection.	The flu shot is a vaccine.
vaccines are not 100% effective at preventing infection.	0_1.5.4.1.1.1.	Vaccines are not 100% effective at preventing infection.	con	About 3%(About 3 out of 100 people who get two doses of MMR vaccine will get measles if exposed to the virus.) of vaccinated people exposed to the measles virus will still contract measles.	10-20% of those of have been vaccinated against polio may still contract the virus.
about 3%(about 3 out of 100 people who get two doses of mmr vaccine will get measles if exposed to the virus.) of vaccinated people exposed to the measles virus will still contract measles.	0_1.5.4.1.1.1.1.	About 3%(About 3 out of 100 people who get two doses of MMR vaccine will get measles if exposed to the virus.) of vaccinated people exposed to the measles virus will still contract measles.	con	
10-20% of those of have been vaccinated against polio may still contract the virus.	0_1.5.4.1.1.1.2.	10-20% of those of have been vaccinated against polio may still contract the virus.	con	
the flu shot is a vaccine.	0_1.5.4.1.1.2.	The flu shot is a vaccine.	con	
the virus may mutate, making the vaccine redundant.	0_1.5.5.	The virus may mutate, making the vaccine redundant.	con	A virus' ability to mutate is not a valid reason to stop making a vaccine. Once the base formula is perfected, it can simply be tweaked to adjust to the mutations.	SARS-CoV-2 will continue to mutate. A vaccine made for the current strain will be less effective for subsequent variants of the virus, allowing the pandemic to persist.	The immunity conferred by vaccines can be supplemented(The response to a booster dose is characterized by a shorter lag period and is also prompt, powerful, and prolonged—producing antibodies which last for longer periods with high avidity (capacity to bind to antigen is high). Both IgM and IgG antibodies are produced due to collaboration between B cells and T cells. This accelerated response is attributed to immunological memory and forms the basis of vaccination and revaccination.) by booster doses, which can ensure that antibodies persist for longer and have a higher affinity for binding to antigens.	Early in the pandemic, scientists reported that SARS-CoV-2 was slowly mutating.
a virus' ability to mutate is not a valid reason to stop making a vaccine. once the base formula is perfected, it can simply be tweaked to adjust to the mutations.	0_1.5.5.1.	A virus' ability to mutate is not a valid reason to stop making a vaccine. Once the base formula is perfected, it can simply be tweaked to adjust to the mutations.	pro	The influenza vaccine is administered to millions of people each year and can be easily adjusted to combat new strains.	Pfizer-BioNTech is carrying out research to determine the sort of adaptations they need to make for the vaccine to stay effective against variants.	The vaccine can be adapted to ensure it is able to continue providing protection to people even after mutations occur.	Even if those tweaks are made, it doesn't solve supply chain problems that would make it difficult to continuously roll out new vaccines around the world.
the influenza vaccine is administered to millions of people each year and can be easily adjusted to combat new strains.	0_1.5.5.1.1.	The influenza vaccine is administered to millions of people each year and can be easily adjusted to combat new strains.	pro	
pfizer-biontech is carrying out research to determine the sort of adaptations they need to make for the vaccine to stay effective against variants.	0_1.5.5.1.2.	Pfizer-BioNTech is carrying out research to determine the sort of adaptations they need to make for the vaccine to stay effective against variants.	pro	
the vaccine can be adapted to ensure it is able to continue providing protection to people even after mutations occur.	0_1.5.5.1.3.	The vaccine can be adapted to ensure it is able to continue providing protection to people even after mutations occur.	pro	
even if those tweaks are made, it doesn't solve supply chain problems that would make it difficult to continuously roll out new vaccines around the world.	0_1.5.5.1.4.	Even if those tweaks are made, it doesn't solve supply chain problems that would make it difficult to continuously roll out new vaccines around the world.	con	
sars-cov-2 will continue to mutate. a vaccine made for the current strain will be less effective for subsequent variants of the virus, allowing the pandemic to persist.	0_1.5.5.2.	SARS-CoV-2 will continue to mutate. A vaccine made for the current strain will be less effective for subsequent variants of the virus, allowing the pandemic to persist.	con	Vaccine makers are exploring ways in which they can redesign their shots so that people are protected against Covid-19 variants as well.	Some evidence has emerged that existing vaccines are less effective against the Delta variant than the original strand of the virus.
vaccine makers are exploring ways in which they can redesign their shots so that people are protected against covid-19 variants as well.	0_1.5.5.2.1.	Vaccine makers are exploring ways in which they can redesign their shots so that people are protected against Covid-19 variants as well.	pro	
some evidence has emerged that existing vaccines are less effective against the delta variant than the original strand of the virus.	0_1.5.5.2.2.	Some evidence has emerged that existing vaccines are less effective against the Delta variant than the original strand of the virus.	con	
early in the pandemic, scientists reported that sars-cov-2 was slowly mutating.	0_1.5.5.4.	Early in the pandemic, scientists reported that SARS-CoV-2 was slowly mutating.	con	These mutations are slow, usually not deleterious, and occur in specific regions of the virus. A vaccine would be specific to the more stable part of the virus.
these mutations are slow, usually not deleterious, and occur in specific regions of the virus. a vaccine would be specific to the more stable part of the virus.	0_1.5.5.4.1.	These mutations are slow, usually not deleterious, and occur in specific regions of the virus. A vaccine would be specific to the more stable part of the virus.	pro	
by more quickly allowing for a return to normal conditions, vaccines would be better for the economy of affected countries.	0_1.6.	By more quickly allowing for a return to normal conditions, vaccines would be better for the economy of affected countries.	pro	A globally distributed vaccine will allow international travel to resume.	A fully vaccinated population will allow for an end to lockdowns and social distancing regulations, which will enable businesses to operate at pre-pandemic levels.	Because access to vaccines is limited, wealthier countries with greater access will have a head start on their economic recovery, increasing the wealth disparity between nations.	A vaccine will allow countries to reduce or eliminate time and resources currently spent on testing and treatment and refocus them on economic recovery and on instituting long-term preventative measures to improve their responses to potential future viral outbreaks.
a globally distributed vaccine will allow international travel to resume.	0_1.6.1.	A globally distributed vaccine will allow international travel to resume.	pro	The Covid-19 pandemic has been responsible for an estimated 100 million jobs lost in the tourism sector globally.	International travel declined 76% in the US during the Covid-19 pandemic.	The increase in domestic travel resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic is better for the environment and for local economies.
the covid-19 pandemic has been responsible for an estimated 100 million jobs lost in the tourism sector globally.	0_1.6.1.1.	The Covid-19 pandemic has been responsible for an estimated 100 million jobs lost in the tourism sector globally.	pro	
international travel declined 76% in the us during the covid-19 pandemic.	0_1.6.1.2.	International travel declined 76% in the US during the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	
the increase in domestic travel resulting from the covid-19 pandemic is better for the environment and for local economies.	0_1.6.1.3.	The increase in domestic travel resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic is better for the environment and for local economies.	con	Not all countries' tourism industries can be sustained by domestic tourism alone.	Aviation, a key component of international travel, is responsible(Around 2.4% of global CO2 emissions come from aviation. Together with other gases and the water vapour trails produced by aircraft, the industry is responsible for around 5% of global warming.) for about 5% of all global warming.
not all countries' tourism industries can be sustained by domestic tourism alone.	0_1.6.1.3.1.	Not all countries' tourism industries can be sustained by domestic tourism alone.	pro	Thailand saw nearly 40 million tourists(The ever rising number of tourists to Thailand came to an abrupt end from March 2020 onwards. 2020 saw only a total of 6,702,396 tourists, almost all arriving in the first three months of the year. From March 2020 to end August 2020 no tourists were allowed in.) per year before the Covid-19 pandemic, when numbers dropped to virtually zero.	Travel and tourism contributed $34.52 billion to the Turkish economy in 2019. This dropped sharply in 2020, due to the pandemic.
thailand saw nearly 40 million tourists(the ever rising number of tourists to thailand came to an abrupt end from march 2020 onwards. 2020 saw only a total of 6,702,396 tourists, almost all arriving in the first three months of the year. from march 2020 to end august 2020 no tourists were allowed in.) per year before the covid-19 pandemic, when numbers dropped to virtually zero.	0_1.6.1.3.1.1.	Thailand saw nearly 40 million tourists(The ever rising number of tourists to Thailand came to an abrupt end from March 2020 onwards. 2020 saw only a total of 6,702,396 tourists, almost all arriving in the first three months of the year. From March 2020 to end August 2020 no tourists were allowed in.) per year before the Covid-19 pandemic, when numbers dropped to virtually zero.	pro	
travel and tourism contributed $34.52 billion to the turkish economy in 2019. this dropped sharply in 2020, due to the pandemic.	0_1.6.1.3.1.2.	Travel and tourism contributed $34.52 billion to the Turkish economy in 2019. This dropped sharply in 2020, due to the pandemic.	pro	
aviation, a key component of international travel, is responsible(around 2.4% of global co2 emissions come from aviation. together with other gases and the water vapour trails produced by aircraft, the industry is responsible for around 5% of global warming.) for about 5% of all global warming.	0_1.6.1.3.2.	Aviation, a key component of international travel, is responsible(Around 2.4% of global CO2 emissions come from aviation. Together with other gases and the water vapour trails produced by aircraft, the industry is responsible for around 5% of global warming.) for about 5% of all global warming.	con	
a fully vaccinated population will allow for an end to lockdowns and social distancing regulations, which will enable businesses to operate at pre-pandemic levels.	0_1.6.2.	A fully vaccinated population will allow for an end to lockdowns and social distancing regulations, which will enable businesses to operate at pre-pandemic levels.	pro	Social distancing requires many businesses to operate at less than full capacity, which prohibits them from reaching their full economic potential.	Most businesses have adapted to the Covid-19 pandemic, and continue to operate even with regulations.
most businesses have adapted to the covid-19 pandemic, and continue to operate even with regulations.	0_1.6.2.2.	Most businesses have adapted to the Covid-19 pandemic, and continue to operate even with regulations.	con	
because access to vaccines is limited, wealthier countries with greater access will have a head start on their economic recovery, increasing the wealth disparity between nations.	0_1.6.3.	Because access to vaccines is limited, wealthier countries with greater access will have a head start on their economic recovery, increasing the wealth disparity between nations.	con	Many developing countries will not have full access to vaccines until at least 2023.	While the US, with relatively high vaccination rates, saw its GDP grow(Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased in all 50 states and the District of Columbia in the first quarter of 2021, as real GDP for the nation increased at an annual rate of 6.4 percent, according to statistics released today by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.) 6.4% in the first quarter of 2021, Thailand, whose vaccination rates are low, saw the economy shrink(The shock of the second wave caused the economy to contract by -2.6 percent in the first quarter of 2021, following a 6.1 percent drop in GDP in 2020—one of the steepest contractions among Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states.) by 2.6%.	In July 2021, India was projecting("We estimate that gross domestic product (GDP) will grow 11.5% in Q1 (first quarter) and 8.4-10.1% for the whole year 2021–22," the think-tank said.) 11.5% GDP growth in Q1, despite having only 6% of their population fully vaccinated.
while the us, with relatively high vaccination rates, saw its gdp grow(real gross domestic product (gdp) increased in all 50 states and the district of columbia in the first quarter of 2021, as real gdp for the nation increased at an annual rate of 6.4 percent, according to statistics released today by the u.s. bureau of economic analysis.) 6.4% in the first quarter of 2021, thailand, whose vaccination rates are low, saw the economy shrink(the shock of the second wave caused the economy to contract by -2.6 percent in the first quarter of 2021, following a 6.1 percent drop in gdp in 2020—one of the steepest contractions among association of southeast asian nations (asean) member states.) by 2.6%.	0_1.6.3.2.	While the US, with relatively high vaccination rates, saw its GDP grow(Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased in all 50 states and the District of Columbia in the first quarter of 2021, as real GDP for the nation increased at an annual rate of 6.4 percent, according to statistics released today by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.) 6.4% in the first quarter of 2021, Thailand, whose vaccination rates are low, saw the economy shrink(The shock of the second wave caused the economy to contract by -2.6 percent in the first quarter of 2021, following a 6.1 percent drop in GDP in 2020—one of the steepest contractions among Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states.) by 2.6%.	con	
in july 2021, india was projecting("we estimate that gross domestic product (gdp) will grow 11.5% in q1 (first quarter) and 8.4-10.1% for the whole year 2021–22," the think-tank said.) 11.5% gdp growth in q1, despite having only 6% of their population fully vaccinated.	0_1.6.3.3.	In July 2021, India was projecting("We estimate that gross domestic product (GDP) will grow 11.5% in Q1 (first quarter) and 8.4-10.1% for the whole year 2021–22," the think-tank said.) 11.5% GDP growth in Q1, despite having only 6% of their population fully vaccinated.	pro	
a vaccine will allow countries to reduce or eliminate time and resources currently spent on testing and treatment and refocus them on economic recovery and on instituting long-term preventative measures to improve their responses to potential future viral outbreaks.	0_1.6.4.	A vaccine will allow countries to reduce or eliminate time and resources currently spent on testing and treatment and refocus them on economic recovery and on instituting long-term preventative measures to improve their responses to potential future viral outbreaks.	pro	It is expected that by 2025, $157 billion will be spent on vaccines alone, meaning that not many resources will be freed up to refocus on economic recovery.	The average cost of Covid-19 treatment can run into tens of thousands of dollars, placing a huge financial burden both on the state and individuals.	Given the large number of viruses on the planet, many scientists predict that it will only be a matter of time before another, possibly more deadly, pandemic emerges.
it is expected that by 2025, $157 billion will be spent on vaccines alone, meaning that not many resources will be freed up to refocus on economic recovery.	0_1.6.4.1.	It is expected that by 2025, $157 billion will be spent on vaccines alone, meaning that not many resources will be freed up to refocus on economic recovery.	con	
the average cost of covid-19 treatment can run into tens of thousands of dollars, placing a huge financial burden both on the state and individuals.	0_1.6.4.2.	The average cost of Covid-19 treatment can run into tens of thousands of dollars, placing a huge financial burden both on the state and individuals.	pro	
given the large number of viruses on the planet, many scientists predict that it will only be a matter of time before another, possibly more deadly, pandemic emerges.	0_1.6.4.3.	Given the large number of viruses on the planet, many scientists predict that it will only be a matter of time before another, possibly more deadly, pandemic emerges.	pro	
covid-19 is much more dangerous than regular flu viruses.	1_1.	Covid-19 is much more dangerous than regular flu viruses.	pro	Covid 19 is 99% survivable making it less deadly than the flu	Covid-19 poses a greater risk than the flu for those without access to vaccines.	Covid-19 infections can overwhelm health systems due to the sharp increase in people requiring hospitalization and respiratory support.	Covid-19 and the flu spread in similar ways.	As of March 2021, there were fewer treatment options available for Covid-19 infections than for flu infections.	Covid-19 and the flu are the same symptomatically.	There are countries with very few or no Covid-19 related measures in place, and yet they have suffered few negative repercussions.	Compared to the flu, the death rate for Covid-19 patients is very high.
covid 19 is 99% survivable making it less deadly than the flu	1_1.1.	Covid 19 is 99% survivable making it less deadly than the flu	con	
covid-19 poses a greater risk than the flu for those without access to vaccines.	1_1.2.	Covid-19 poses a greater risk than the flu for those without access to vaccines.	pro	Various companies have successfully developed vaccines and treatments.	Preventing people from contracting Covid-19 becomes extremely difficult without a vaccine.	The risk is rather low for the vast majority of people testing positive for Covid-19, with only 2% needing intensive care.
various companies have successfully developed vaccines and treatments.	1_1.2.1.	Various companies have successfully developed vaccines and treatments.	con	A vaccine would normally take years, if not decades, to develop, which illustrates the urgency with which governments and pharmaceutical companies worked to tackle Covid-19.	As of March 23, 2021, there were 79 vaccines in trial, with seven approved for full use.
a vaccine would normally take years, if not decades, to develop, which illustrates the urgency with which governments and pharmaceutical companies worked to tackle covid-19.	1_1.2.1.1.	A vaccine would normally take years, if not decades, to develop, which illustrates the urgency with which governments and pharmaceutical companies worked to tackle Covid-19.	con	In the time it took to develop vaccines, a significant number of people lost their lives.
in the time it took to develop vaccines, a significant number of people lost their lives.	1_1.2.1.1.1.	In the time it took to develop vaccines, a significant number of people lost their lives.	pro	People who are dying from Covid-19 are oftentimes old, have other severe illnesses, and have a weak immune system. They would have likely died from diseases like seasonal flu which also attack people with weak immune systems.	The first vaccine shot for Covid-19 was administered on 14 December 2020. By then, 1,685,371 people had already died of Covid-19.	Even after the vaccine had been developed, countries faced significant logistical and organizational issues that have impeded people's ability to access the vaccine. Slower vaccine rollout has prolonged the pandemic and thus lead to more deaths.
people who are dying from covid-19 are oftentimes old, have other severe illnesses, and have a weak immune system. they would have likely died from diseases like seasonal flu which also attack people with weak immune systems.	1_1.2.1.1.1.1.	People who are dying from Covid-19 are oftentimes old, have other severe illnesses, and have a weak immune system. They would have likely died from diseases like seasonal flu which also attack people with weak immune systems.	con	
the first vaccine shot for covid-19 was administered on 14 december 2020. by then, 1,685,371 people had already died of covid-19.	1_1.2.1.1.1.2.	The first vaccine shot for Covid-19 was administered on 14 December 2020. By then, 1,685,371 people had already died of Covid-19.	pro	
even after the vaccine had been developed, countries faced significant logistical and organizational issues that have impeded people's ability to access the vaccine. slower vaccine rollout has prolonged the pandemic and thus lead to more deaths.	1_1.2.1.1.1.3.	Even after the vaccine had been developed, countries faced significant logistical and organizational issues that have impeded people's ability to access the vaccine. Slower vaccine rollout has prolonged the pandemic and thus lead to more deaths.	pro	The intricacies of transport and storage complicate the rollout of the vaccine.	Due to supply chain issues, Pfizer has announced that it will only be able to rollout half its expected volume of the vaccine in 2021.	Coordinating the vaccine distribution plan has proven to be a challenge, particularly in countries that do not have a central healthcare registry.
the intricacies of transport and storage complicate the rollout of the vaccine.	1_1.2.1.1.1.3.1.	The intricacies of transport and storage complicate the rollout of the vaccine.	pro	
due to supply chain issues, pfizer has announced that it will only be able to rollout half its expected volume of the vaccine in 2021.	1_1.2.1.1.1.3.2.	Due to supply chain issues, Pfizer has announced that it will only be able to rollout half its expected volume of the vaccine in 2021.	pro	
coordinating the vaccine distribution plan has proven to be a challenge, particularly in countries that do not have a central healthcare registry.	1_1.2.1.1.1.3.3.	Coordinating the vaccine distribution plan has proven to be a challenge, particularly in countries that do not have a central healthcare registry.	pro	
as of march 23, 2021, there were 79 vaccines in trial, with seven approved for full use.	1_1.2.1.2.	As of March 23, 2021, there were 79 vaccines in trial, with seven approved for full use.	con	
preventing people from contracting covid-19 becomes extremely difficult without a vaccine.	1_1.2.2.	Preventing people from contracting Covid-19 becomes extremely difficult without a vaccine.	pro	This situation is similar to one where a new flu virus strain is emerging and the existing flu shots are not effective anymore.	Even with vaccines, 100% protection from either the flu or Covid-19 is not guaranteed.	This is evidenced by the rampant spread of Covid-19 throughout the world.	Many people are unwilling to follow guidelines that help prevent the spread of Covid-19.
this situation is similar to one where a new flu virus strain is emerging and the existing flu shots are not effective anymore.	1_1.2.2.1.	This situation is similar to one where a new flu virus strain is emerging and the existing flu shots are not effective anymore.	con	New flu viruses emerge each year, but unlike Covid-19, these variants don't kill hundreds of thousands of people in the US.
new flu viruses emerge each year, but unlike covid-19, these variants don't kill hundreds of thousands of people in the us.	1_1.2.2.1.1.	New flu viruses emerge each year, but unlike Covid-19, these variants don't kill hundreds of thousands of people in the US.	pro	
even with vaccines, 100% protection from either the flu or covid-19 is not guaranteed.	1_1.2.2.2.	Even with vaccines, 100% protection from either the flu or Covid-19 is not guaranteed.	con	Even those who are vaccinated can spread the virus.	100% protection is only guaranteed by the total eradication of the virus, which is not the purpose of vaccines. Rather, the purpose is to manage the outbreak's uncontrolled spread to managable levels.	New variants of Covid-19 could be relatively more resistant to vaccines.
even those who are vaccinated can spread the virus.	1_1.2.2.2.1.	Even those who are vaccinated can spread the virus.	con	Covid-19 vaccines can help keep symptoms at bay but do not necessarily stop the transmission of the virus as viral particles persist in the nose and throat.	The CDC has established that it is highly unlikely that those who have been vaccinated will be able to transmit Covid-19.
covid-19 vaccines can help keep symptoms at bay but do not necessarily stop the transmission of the virus as viral particles persist in the nose and throat.	1_1.2.2.2.1.1.	Covid-19 vaccines can help keep symptoms at bay but do not necessarily stop the transmission of the virus as viral particles persist in the nose and throat.	con	
the cdc has established that it is highly unlikely that those who have been vaccinated will be able to transmit covid-19.	1_1.2.2.2.1.2.	The CDC has established that it is highly unlikely that those who have been vaccinated will be able to transmit Covid-19.	pro	
100% protection is only guaranteed by the total eradication of the virus, which is not the purpose of vaccines. rather, the purpose is to manage the outbreak's uncontrolled spread to managable levels.	1_1.2.2.2.2.	100% protection is only guaranteed by the total eradication of the virus, which is not the purpose of vaccines. Rather, the purpose is to manage the outbreak's uncontrolled spread to managable levels.	pro	
new variants of covid-19 could be relatively more resistant to vaccines.	1_1.2.2.2.3.	New variants of Covid-19 could be relatively more resistant to vaccines.	con	
this is evidenced by the rampant spread of covid-19 throughout the world.	1_1.2.2.3.	This is evidenced by the rampant spread of Covid-19 throughout the world.	pro	
many people are unwilling to follow guidelines that help prevent the spread of covid-19.	1_1.2.2.4.	Many people are unwilling to follow guidelines that help prevent the spread of Covid-19.	pro	One study found that only half of American adults wore masks when in close contact with others outside their home.
one study found that only half of american adults wore masks when in close contact with others outside their home.	1_1.2.2.4.1.	One study found that only half of American adults wore masks when in close contact with others outside their home.	pro	There have been multiple reports of anti-maskers contracting the virus and then admitting they were wrong to not follow health guidelines.
there have been multiple reports of anti-maskers contracting the virus and then admitting they were wrong to not follow health guidelines.	1_1.2.2.4.1.1.	There have been multiple reports of anti-maskers contracting the virus and then admitting they were wrong to not follow health guidelines.	pro	
the risk is rather low for the vast majority of people testing positive for covid-19, with only 2% needing intensive care.	1_1.2.3.	The risk is rather low for the vast majority of people testing positive for Covid-19, with only 2% needing intensive care.	con	
covid-19 infections can overwhelm health systems due to the sharp increase in people requiring hospitalization and respiratory support.	1_1.3.	Covid-19 infections can overwhelm health systems due to the sharp increase in people requiring hospitalization and respiratory support.	pro	Covid-19 is more infectious than the regular flu, so it infects a greater number of people overall. This increases the number of people requiring medical resources.	A study in December 2020 found that, compared with the influenza virus, Covid-19 was associated with increased health resource use.	Covid-19 cases would be less likely to overwhelm health systems if the systems weren't already dysfunctional in many countries.	Hospitals have previously been overwhelmed by influenza patients as well.	There are countries with very few or no Covid-19 related measures in place, and yet they have suffered few negative repercussions.	A study in March 2021 showed that patients with Covid-19 are significantly less often treated as outpatients than patients with influenza.	Hospitalization among Covid-19 patients is likely to fall significantly after vaccination.	Covid-19 infections have a higher risk of complications that require hospitalization arising.
covid-19 is more infectious than the regular flu, so it infects a greater number of people overall. this increases the number of people requiring medical resources.	1_1.3.1.	Covid-19 is more infectious than the regular flu, so it infects a greater number of people overall. This increases the number of people requiring medical resources.	pro	Disease experts estimate that each Covid-19 sufferer infects between 2 to 3 others.	A person with Covid-19 may be contagious for a longer period of time than a person with the flu.	Increased transmissibility of Covid-19 is likely to lead to an increase in hospitalisations.
disease experts estimate that each covid-19 sufferer infects between 2 to 3 others.	1_1.3.1.1.	Disease experts estimate that each Covid-19 sufferer infects between 2 to 3 others.	pro	That's a reproduction rate up to twice as high as seasonal flu, which typically infects 1.3 new people for each patient.	The rate of spread alone does not prove how dangerous a virus is.
that's a reproduction rate up to twice as high as seasonal flu, which typically infects 1.3 new people for each patient.	1_1.3.1.1.1.	That's a reproduction rate up to twice as high as seasonal flu, which typically infects 1.3 new people for each patient.	pro	
the rate of spread alone does not prove how dangerous a virus is.	1_1.3.1.1.2.	The rate of spread alone does not prove how dangerous a virus is.	con	Only when the propagation rates of viruses are coupled with their corresponding death rates per infected person is it possible to compare their dangerousness.
only when the propagation rates of viruses are coupled with their corresponding death rates per infected person is it possible to compare their dangerousness.	1_1.3.1.1.2.1.	Only when the propagation rates of viruses are coupled with their corresponding death rates per infected person is it possible to compare their dangerousness.	con	If the rate of spread alone was used as a measure of risk, HIV could be seen as less dangerous than the flu because of its low propagation rate.	The rate of spread is relevant to a virus' ability to overrun healthcare systems if the hospitalization rate is high, even if the death rate is low.
if the rate of spread alone was used as a measure of risk, hiv could be seen as less dangerous than the flu because of its low propagation rate.	1_1.3.1.1.2.1.1.	If the rate of spread alone was used as a measure of risk, HIV could be seen as less dangerous than the flu because of its low propagation rate.	con	
the rate of spread is relevant to a virus' ability to overrun healthcare systems if the hospitalization rate is high, even if the death rate is low.	1_1.3.1.1.2.1.2.	The rate of spread is relevant to a virus' ability to overrun healthcare systems if the hospitalization rate is high, even if the death rate is low.	pro	
a person with covid-19 may be contagious for a longer period of time than a person with the flu.	1_1.3.1.2.	A person with Covid-19 may be contagious for a longer period of time than a person with the flu.	pro	A person with Covid-19 may infect others for up to ten days after developing symptoms, while a person with the flu will remain infectious for 5-7 days after developing symptoms.
a person with covid-19 may infect others for up to ten days after developing symptoms, while a person with the flu will remain infectious for 5-7 days after developing symptoms.	1_1.3.1.2.1.	A person with Covid-19 may infect others for up to ten days after developing symptoms, while a person with the flu will remain infectious for 5-7 days after developing symptoms.	pro	
increased transmissibility of covid-19 is likely to lead to an increase in hospitalisations.	1_1.3.1.3.	Increased transmissibility of Covid-19 is likely to lead to an increase in hospitalisations.	pro	Some new variants of Covid-19 are likely to lead to greater hospitalization rates because they are more transmissible than the other variants.
some new variants of covid-19 are likely to lead to greater hospitalization rates because they are more transmissible than the other variants.	1_1.3.1.3.1.	Some new variants of Covid-19 are likely to lead to greater hospitalization rates because they are more transmissible than the other variants.	pro	
a study in december 2020 found that, compared with the influenza virus, covid-19 was associated with increased health resource use.	1_1.3.2.	A study in December 2020 found that, compared with the influenza virus, Covid-19 was associated with increased health resource use.	pro	Patients with Covid-19 are more likely to need intensive care.	Patients with Covid-19 are likely to stay in intensive care units for twice longer(Patients with COVID-19 were more likely to need intensive care, and the mean length of stay in the ICU for COVID-19 was twice as long) than patients with the flu.	In January 2021, there were more patients with Covid-19 in London's acute hospitals than patients without Covid-19.
patients with covid-19 are more likely to need intensive care.	1_1.3.2.1.	Patients with Covid-19 are more likely to need intensive care.	pro	Covid-19 patients are more often treated with vasopressors and renal replacement therapy than influenza patients.	Hospitalized Covid-19 patients have a more frequent need for oxygen therapy and invasive ventilation than patients with influenza.
covid-19 patients are more often treated with vasopressors and renal replacement therapy than influenza patients.	1_1.3.2.1.1.	Covid-19 patients are more often treated with vasopressors and renal replacement therapy than influenza patients.	pro	
hospitalized covid-19 patients have a more frequent need for oxygen therapy and invasive ventilation than patients with influenza.	1_1.3.2.1.2.	Hospitalized Covid-19 patients have a more frequent need for oxygen therapy and invasive ventilation than patients with influenza.	pro	
patients with covid-19 are likely to stay in intensive care units for twice longer(patients with covid-19 were more likely to need intensive care, and the mean length of stay in the icu for covid-19 was twice as long) than patients with the flu.	1_1.3.2.2.	Patients with Covid-19 are likely to stay in intensive care units for twice longer(Patients with COVID-19 were more likely to need intensive care, and the mean length of stay in the ICU for COVID-19 was twice as long) than patients with the flu.	pro	
in january 2021, there were more patients with covid-19 in london's acute hospitals than patients without covid-19.	1_1.3.2.3.	In January 2021, there were more patients with Covid-19 in London's acute hospitals than patients without Covid-19.	pro	
covid-19 cases would be less likely to overwhelm health systems if the systems weren't already dysfunctional in many countries.	1_1.3.3.	Covid-19 cases would be less likely to overwhelm health systems if the systems weren't already dysfunctional in many countries.	con	India's healthcare infrastructure has been chronically underfunded and unequal for many years.	The US healthcare system was broken long before the Covid-19 pandemic.	Many European countries that have highly ranked healthcare systems experienced great difficulties during the pandemic.	Increased hospitalization of Covid-19 patients due to a malfunctioning heath system still entails that it is dangerous, even if only contingently so.
india's healthcare infrastructure has been chronically underfunded and unequal for many years.	1_1.3.3.1.	India's healthcare infrastructure has been chronically underfunded and unequal for many years.	con	India's enormous spike in cases and deaths in April 2021 was exacerbated by poor management and supply shortages.
india's enormous spike in cases and deaths in april 2021 was exacerbated by poor management and supply shortages.	1_1.3.3.1.1.	India's enormous spike in cases and deaths in April 2021 was exacerbated by poor management and supply shortages.	con	
the us healthcare system was broken long before the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.3.3.2.	The US healthcare system was broken long before the Covid-19 pandemic.	con	Even on normal days, hospitals in the US are nearly at capacity. A Covid-19 outbreak was bound to overwhelm such limited resources.
even on normal days, hospitals in the us are nearly at capacity. a covid-19 outbreak was bound to overwhelm such limited resources.	1_1.3.3.2.1.	Even on normal days, hospitals in the US are nearly at capacity. A Covid-19 outbreak was bound to overwhelm such limited resources.	con	
many european countries that have highly ranked healthcare systems experienced great difficulties during the pandemic.	1_1.3.3.3.	Many European countries that have highly ranked healthcare systems experienced great difficulties during the pandemic.	pro	Hospitals in France have repeatedly been overwhelmed(An operation to transfer intensive care patients from overloaded hospitals to lesser-hit regions and a full lockdown in the hardest-hit parts of France had also been discussed), leading to large scale lockdowns.	Italy, the healthcare system of which is widely considered world-class, was pushed to its breaking point due to the healthcare demands created by the Covid-19 pandemic.	Healthcare systems in Belgium, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom suffered greatly due to the pandemic (p. 68).	Countries that had strong public heath responses were able to contain Covid-19 infections relatively successfully.
hospitals in france have repeatedly been overwhelmed(an operation to transfer intensive care patients from overloaded hospitals to lesser-hit regions and a full lockdown in the hardest-hit parts of france had also been discussed), leading to large scale lockdowns.	1_1.3.3.3.1.	Hospitals in France have repeatedly been overwhelmed(An operation to transfer intensive care patients from overloaded hospitals to lesser-hit regions and a full lockdown in the hardest-hit parts of France had also been discussed), leading to large scale lockdowns.	pro	
italy, the healthcare system of which is widely considered world-class, was pushed to its breaking point due to the healthcare demands created by the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.3.3.3.2.	Italy, the healthcare system of which is widely considered world-class, was pushed to its breaking point due to the healthcare demands created by the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	
healthcare systems in belgium, italy, spain and the united kingdom suffered greatly due to the pandemic (p. 68).	1_1.3.3.3.3.	Healthcare systems in Belgium, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom suffered greatly due to the pandemic (p. 68).	pro	The NHS in the UK has been overburdened due to the pandemic.
the nhs in the uk has been overburdened due to the pandemic.	1_1.3.3.3.3.1.	The NHS in the UK has been overburdened due to the pandemic.	pro	
countries that had strong public heath responses were able to contain covid-19 infections relatively successfully.	1_1.3.3.3.4.	Countries that had strong public heath responses were able to contain Covid-19 infections relatively successfully.	con	
increased hospitalization of covid-19 patients due to a malfunctioning heath system still entails that it is dangerous, even if only contingently so.	1_1.3.3.4.	Increased hospitalization of Covid-19 patients due to a malfunctioning heath system still entails that it is dangerous, even if only contingently so.	pro	
hospitals have previously been overwhelmed by influenza patients as well.	1_1.3.4.	Hospitals have previously been overwhelmed by influenza patients as well.	con	There was a flu epidemic in the US in 2017-2018, which overwhelmed hospitals in nearly every state.	In 2013, many hospitals in the US were overwhelmed by flu cases.	In 2017, hospitals in France were overwhelmed by the flu epidemic.	The early phase of the Covid-19 epidemic was associated with a higher demand for both critical care and regular care hospital beds than seasonal influenza epidemics with similar numbers of infection.	In 2018, a flu epidemic in the UK led to a surge in cases at hospitals and clinics.	Hospitalization required by severe forms of Covid-19 and seasonal influenza infections differ considerably.
there was a flu epidemic in the us in 2017-2018, which overwhelmed hospitals in nearly every state.	1_1.3.4.1.	There was a flu epidemic in the US in 2017-2018, which overwhelmed hospitals in nearly every state.	con	Many hospitals were forced to treat patients in tents.	61,000 people died as a result of this epidemic. In comparison, 350,000 people lost their lives to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
many hospitals were forced to treat patients in tents.	1_1.3.4.1.1.	Many hospitals were forced to treat patients in tents.	con	
61,000 people died as a result of this epidemic. in comparison, 350,000 people lost their lives to the covid-19 pandemic in 2020.	1_1.3.4.1.2.	61,000 people died as a result of this epidemic. In comparison, 350,000 people lost their lives to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.	pro	
in 2013, many hospitals in the us were overwhelmed by flu cases.	1_1.3.4.2.	In 2013, many hospitals in the US were overwhelmed by flu cases.	con	
in 2017, hospitals in france were overwhelmed by the flu epidemic.	1_1.3.4.3.	In 2017, hospitals in France were overwhelmed by the flu epidemic.	con	
the early phase of the covid-19 epidemic was associated with a higher demand for both critical care and regular care hospital beds than seasonal influenza epidemics with similar numbers of infection.	1_1.3.4.4.	The early phase of the Covid-19 epidemic was associated with a higher demand for both critical care and regular care hospital beds than seasonal influenza epidemics with similar numbers of infection.	pro	
in 2018, a flu epidemic in the uk led to a surge in cases at hospitals and clinics.	1_1.3.4.5.	In 2018, a flu epidemic in the UK led to a surge in cases at hospitals and clinics.	con	
hospitalization required by severe forms of covid-19 and seasonal influenza infections differ considerably.	1_1.3.4.6.	Hospitalization required by severe forms of Covid-19 and seasonal influenza infections differ considerably.	pro	
there are countries with very few or no covid-19 related measures in place, and yet they have suffered few negative repercussions.	1_1.3.5.	There are countries with very few or no Covid-19 related measures in place, and yet they have suffered few negative repercussions.	con	In the US state of Florida, since Oct 2020, it has not been mandatory to wear masks and adhere to social distancing. Additionally no vaccine was available at that time either. Yet the Covid-19 related case rates are similar or fewer than in other states like California which have measures in place.	Sweden didn't have drastic measures in place in 2020 and the health system did not become overwhelmed with patients.	The countries that have best responded to the pandemic are those that instituted quick and effective measures.	Many African countries have few Covid-19 measures in place and have even rejected vaccines, but there have not been reports of overflowing hospitals or excessive deaths.	Even if Covid-19 death rate varies depending on different levels of medical preparedness, it does not entail that it is less dangerous than the flu.	India did not prepare its health system for the second wave and, as a result, saw a huge increase in death rate.
in the us state of florida, since oct 2020, it has not been mandatory to wear masks and adhere to social distancing. additionally no vaccine was available at that time either. yet the covid-19 related case rates are similar or fewer than in other states like california which have measures in place.	1_1.3.5.1.	In the US state of Florida, since Oct 2020, it has not been mandatory to wear masks and adhere to social distancing. Additionally no vaccine was available at that time either. Yet the Covid-19 related case rates are similar or fewer than in other states like California which have measures in place.	con	
sweden didn't have drastic measures in place in 2020 and the health system did not become overwhelmed with patients.	1_1.3.5.2.	Sweden didn't have drastic measures in place in 2020 and the health system did not become overwhelmed with patients.	con	In December 2020, Stockholm requested extra help from the government as its hospitals filled up with Covid-19 patients, and cases and deaths increased.	Through careful planning, Sweden was able to double its intensive care capacity during the Covid-19 pandemic.	There were nationwide staff shortages in Sweden, forcing hospitals to halt all non-essential healthcare services.	Even though Sweden didn't have any drastic Covid-19 measures in place in 2020, the overall death rate was comparable with that of England which had hard lockdowns and other safety measures such as mandatory face masks, etc.
in december 2020, stockholm requested extra help from the government as its hospitals filled up with covid-19 patients, and cases and deaths increased.	1_1.3.5.2.1.	In December 2020, Stockholm requested extra help from the government as its hospitals filled up with Covid-19 patients, and cases and deaths increased.	pro	The mortality rate of Covid-19 has been higher in Sweden than in any of its neighbours.
the mortality rate of covid-19 has been higher in sweden than in any of its neighbours.	1_1.3.5.2.1.1.	The mortality rate of Covid-19 has been higher in Sweden than in any of its neighbours.	pro	
through careful planning, sweden was able to double its intensive care capacity during the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.3.5.2.2.	Through careful planning, Sweden was able to double its intensive care capacity during the Covid-19 pandemic.	con	
there were nationwide staff shortages in sweden, forcing hospitals to halt all non-essential healthcare services.	1_1.3.5.2.3.	There were nationwide staff shortages in Sweden, forcing hospitals to halt all non-essential healthcare services.	pro	An alarming number of healthcare workers in Sweden resigned due to the intense pressure and exhaustion caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.
an alarming number of healthcare workers in sweden resigned due to the intense pressure and exhaustion caused by the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.3.5.2.3.1.	An alarming number of healthcare workers in Sweden resigned due to the intense pressure and exhaustion caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	
even though sweden didn't have any drastic covid-19 measures in place in 2020, the overall death rate was comparable with that of england which had hard lockdowns and other safety measures such as mandatory face masks, etc.	1_1.3.5.2.4.	Even though Sweden didn't have any drastic Covid-19 measures in place in 2020, the overall death rate was comparable with that of England which had hard lockdowns and other safety measures such as mandatory face masks, etc.	con	The death rate in Sweden seems to be lower due to many of the most vulnerable individuals, such as care home residents, being vaccinated.	The UK had an extremely high death toll(Of all the countries with more than 12 million people, the UK had the highest crude pandemic mortality rate by the start of March 2021: 18 people had died of the disease for every 10,000 alive at the start of the year.) due to its failure to lockdown quickly and effectively.
the death rate in sweden seems to be lower due to many of the most vulnerable individuals, such as care home residents, being vaccinated.	1_1.3.5.2.4.1.	The death rate in Sweden seems to be lower due to many of the most vulnerable individuals, such as care home residents, being vaccinated.	pro	
the uk had an extremely high death toll(of all the countries with more than 12 million people, the uk had the highest crude pandemic mortality rate by the start of march 2021: 18 people had died of the disease for every 10,000 alive at the start of the year.) due to its failure to lockdown quickly and effectively.	1_1.3.5.2.4.2.	The UK had an extremely high death toll(Of all the countries with more than 12 million people, the UK had the highest crude pandemic mortality rate by the start of March 2021: 18 people had died of the disease for every 10,000 alive at the start of the year.) due to its failure to lockdown quickly and effectively.	pro	
the countries that have best responded to the pandemic are those that instituted quick and effective measures.	1_1.3.5.3.	The countries that have best responded to the pandemic are those that instituted quick and effective measures.	pro	Taiwan's proactive approach involved contact-tracing, testing, quarantine-treatment, alongside effective social care.	New Zealand owes its success in tackling the pandemic to measures such as border restrictions and national lockdowns.	Singapore enacted strict policies regarding mask-wearing, social distancing, and lockdowns in response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
taiwan's proactive approach involved contact-tracing, testing, quarantine-treatment, alongside effective social care.	1_1.3.5.3.1.	Taiwan's proactive approach involved contact-tracing, testing, quarantine-treatment, alongside effective social care.	pro	
new zealand owes its success in tackling the pandemic to measures such as border restrictions and national lockdowns.	1_1.3.5.3.2.	New Zealand owes its success in tackling the pandemic to measures such as border restrictions and national lockdowns.	pro	
singapore enacted strict policies regarding mask-wearing, social distancing, and lockdowns in response to the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.3.5.3.3.	Singapore enacted strict policies regarding mask-wearing, social distancing, and lockdowns in response to the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	
many african countries have few covid-19 measures in place and have even rejected vaccines, but there have not been reports of overflowing hospitals or excessive deaths.	1_1.3.5.4.	Many African countries have few Covid-19 measures in place and have even rejected vaccines, but there have not been reports of overflowing hospitals or excessive deaths.	con	The president of Tanzania, one of the most outspoken skeptics of the virus, died in March 2021 from what many suspect was a Covid-19 infection.	This is most likely due to under reporting(Stéphane Helleringer, a demographer who has worked on mortality in several African countries, said that on the African continent, “There are very, very few countries that even attempt an estimation of mortality based on death records.”), rather than an accurate assessment of the facts.	It is likely that many countries in Africa will see waves of Covid-19 infections and resulting deaths in the future.
the president of tanzania, one of the most outspoken skeptics of the virus, died in march 2021 from what many suspect was a covid-19 infection.	1_1.3.5.4.1.	The president of Tanzania, one of the most outspoken skeptics of the virus, died in March 2021 from what many suspect was a Covid-19 infection.	pro	
this is most likely due to under reporting(stéphane helleringer, a demographer who has worked on mortality in several african countries, said that on the african continent, “there are very, very few countries that even attempt an estimation of mortality based on death records.”), rather than an accurate assessment of the facts.	1_1.3.5.4.2.	This is most likely due to under reporting(Stéphane Helleringer, a demographer who has worked on mortality in several African countries, said that on the African continent, “There are very, very few countries that even attempt an estimation of mortality based on death records.”), rather than an accurate assessment of the facts.	pro	
it is likely that many countries in africa will see waves of covid-19 infections and resulting deaths in the future.	1_1.3.5.4.3.	It is likely that many countries in Africa will see waves of Covid-19 infections and resulting deaths in the future.	pro	
even if covid-19 death rate varies depending on different levels of medical preparedness, it does not entail that it is less dangerous than the flu.	1_1.3.5.5.	Even if Covid-19 death rate varies depending on different levels of medical preparedness, it does not entail that it is less dangerous than the flu.	pro	
india did not prepare its health system for the second wave and, as a result, saw a huge increase in death rate.	1_1.3.5.6.	India did not prepare its health system for the second wave and, as a result, saw a huge increase in death rate.	pro	
a study in march 2021 showed that patients with covid-19 are significantly less often treated as outpatients than patients with influenza.	1_1.3.6.	A study in March 2021 showed that patients with Covid-19 are significantly less often treated as outpatients than patients with influenza.	pro	
hospitalization among covid-19 patients is likely to fall significantly after vaccination.	1_1.3.7.	Hospitalization among Covid-19 patients is likely to fall significantly after vaccination.	con	A study in March 2021 showed that a single dose of Pfizer and Oxford vaccines reduced the risk of hospital admission by 80% in over 80s.	Even if vaccinations reduce hospitalization, a huge portion of the world population is currently not vaccinated, and therefore Covid-19 infections continue to have high hospitalization rates.	A study showed that elderly patients who are fully vaccinated are 94% less likely to be hospitalized with Covid-19.	New variants of Covid-19 could be relatively more resistant to vaccines.
a study in march 2021 showed that a single dose of pfizer and oxford vaccines reduced the risk of hospital admission by 80% in over 80s.	1_1.3.7.1.	A study in March 2021 showed that a single dose of Pfizer and Oxford vaccines reduced the risk of hospital admission by 80% in over 80s.	con	
even if vaccinations reduce hospitalization, a huge portion of the world population is currently not vaccinated, and therefore covid-19 infections continue to have high hospitalization rates.	1_1.3.7.2.	Even if vaccinations reduce hospitalization, a huge portion of the world population is currently not vaccinated, and therefore Covid-19 infections continue to have high hospitalization rates.	pro	
a study showed that elderly patients who are fully vaccinated are 94% less likely to be hospitalized with covid-19.	1_1.3.7.3.	A study showed that elderly patients who are fully vaccinated are 94% less likely to be hospitalized with Covid-19.	con	
covid-19 infections have a higher risk of complications that require hospitalization arising.	1_1.3.8.	Covid-19 infections have a higher risk of complications that require hospitalization arising.	pro	Covid-19 patients have a higher risk of respiratory complications that require hospitalization than flu patients.	Haemorrhagic strokes are more common among patients with Covid-19 compared to patients with the flu.
covid-19 patients have a higher risk of respiratory complications that require hospitalization than flu patients.	1_1.3.8.1.	Covid-19 patients have a higher risk of respiratory complications that require hospitalization than flu patients.	pro	The risk of pneumonia among Covid-19 patients is twice that of flu patients.	Covid-19 patients have 1.7 times more risk of respiratory failure than flu patients.
the risk of pneumonia among covid-19 patients is twice that of flu patients.	1_1.3.8.1.1.	The risk of pneumonia among Covid-19 patients is twice that of flu patients.	pro	
covid-19 patients have 1.7 times more risk of respiratory failure than flu patients.	1_1.3.8.1.2.	Covid-19 patients have 1.7 times more risk of respiratory failure than flu patients.	pro	Covid-19 infections appear to have a higher potential for respiratory pathogenicity.
covid-19 infections appear to have a higher potential for respiratory pathogenicity.	1_1.3.8.1.2.1.	Covid-19 infections appear to have a higher potential for respiratory pathogenicity.	pro	
haemorrhagic strokes are more common among patients with covid-19 compared to patients with the flu.	1_1.3.8.2.	Haemorrhagic strokes are more common among patients with Covid-19 compared to patients with the flu.	pro	Haemorrhagic strokes require immediate and long-term clinical care.	After suffering from a stroke, a patient will need to stay in the hospital for the next five to seven days.(The typical length of a hospital stay after a stroke is five to seven days. During this time, the stroke care team will evaluate the effects of the stroke, which will determine the rehabilitation plan.)
haemorrhagic strokes require immediate and long-term clinical care.	1_1.3.8.2.1.	Haemorrhagic strokes require immediate and long-term clinical care.	pro	
after suffering from a stroke, a patient will need to stay in the hospital for the next five to seven days.(the typical length of a hospital stay after a stroke is five to seven days. during this time, the stroke care team will evaluate the effects of the stroke, which will determine the rehabilitation plan.)	1_1.3.8.2.2.	After suffering from a stroke, a patient will need to stay in the hospital for the next five to seven days.(The typical length of a hospital stay after a stroke is five to seven days. During this time, the stroke care team will evaluate the effects of the stroke, which will determine the rehabilitation plan.)	pro	
covid-19 and the flu spread in similar ways.	1_1.4.	Covid-19 and the flu spread in similar ways.	con	The speed of transmission of Covid-19 and the flu is different.	The same measures are required to contain the spread of both viruses.	Covid-19 and influenza have shared social determinants of transmission.	The transmissibility of a disease alone is not an accurate measure of how dangerous the disease is. Factors such as the vulnerability of the population, and the capacity of a country to fight the disease must also be considered.	Covid-19 and the flu spread through similar conduits.	The time and conditions that are most conducive for the transmission of the virus are similar for both Covid-19 and influenza.
the speed of transmission of covid-19 and the flu is different.	1_1.4.1.	The speed of transmission of Covid-19 and the flu is different.	pro	Covid-19 is more infectious than the regular flu, so it infects a greater number of people overall. This increases the number of people requiring medical resources.
the same measures are required to contain the spread of both viruses.	1_1.4.2.	The same measures are required to contain the spread of both viruses.	con	Social distancing helps reduce both Covid-19 and flu infections.	The spread of both, Covid-19 and the flu, can be prevented by mask-wearing.	There have been decreases in influenza infections in 2020 due to interventions such as limiting international travel.
social distancing helps reduce both covid-19 and flu infections.	1_1.4.2.1.	Social distancing helps reduce both Covid-19 and flu infections.	con	
the spread of both, covid-19 and the flu, can be prevented by mask-wearing.	1_1.4.2.2.	The spread of both, Covid-19 and the flu, can be prevented by mask-wearing.	con	
there have been decreases in influenza infections in 2020 due to interventions such as limiting international travel.	1_1.4.2.3.	There have been decreases in influenza infections in 2020 due to interventions such as limiting international travel.	con	
covid-19 and influenza have shared social determinants of transmission.	1_1.4.3.	Covid-19 and influenza have shared social determinants of transmission.	con	Social distancing helps reduce both Covid-19 and flu infections.	There is evidence of higher infection and mortality among racially disadvantaged communities in the case of both Covid-19 and influenza.
there is evidence of higher infection and mortality among racially disadvantaged communities in the case of both covid-19 and influenza.	1_1.4.3.2.	There is evidence of higher infection and mortality among racially disadvantaged communities in the case of both Covid-19 and influenza.	con	In the US, Covid-19 incidence and mortality is higher among African American communities.	During the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic in the US, people from African American communities saw higher rates of infection and morbidity.
in the us, covid-19 incidence and mortality is higher among african american communities.	1_1.4.3.2.1.	In the US, Covid-19 incidence and mortality is higher among African American communities.	con	
during the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic in the us, people from african american communities saw higher rates of infection and morbidity.	1_1.4.3.2.2.	During the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic in the US, people from African American communities saw higher rates of infection and morbidity.	con	
the transmissibility of a disease alone is not an accurate measure of how dangerous the disease is. factors such as the vulnerability of the population, and the capacity of a country to fight the disease must also be considered.	1_1.4.4.	The transmissibility of a disease alone is not an accurate measure of how dangerous the disease is. Factors such as the vulnerability of the population, and the capacity of a country to fight the disease must also be considered.	pro	Based on the Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework, researchers rate Covid-19 as a 5 on transmissibility, and a 5-7 on clinical severity, categorising it in the 'Very High Severity' category (the highest available on this framework). By contrast, seasonal influenza generally sits in the 'Low Severity' or 'Moderate Severity' bands, occasionally rising to 'High Severity' at its worst.
based on the pandemic severity assessment framework, researchers rate covid-19 as a 5 on transmissibility, and a 5-7 on clinical severity, categorising it in the 'very high severity' category (the highest available on this framework). by contrast, seasonal influenza generally sits in the 'low severity' or 'moderate severity' bands, occasionally rising to 'high severity' at its worst.	1_1.4.4.1.	Based on the Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework, researchers rate Covid-19 as a 5 on transmissibility, and a 5-7 on clinical severity, categorising it in the 'Very High Severity' category (the highest available on this framework). By contrast, seasonal influenza generally sits in the 'Low Severity' or 'Moderate Severity' bands, occasionally rising to 'High Severity' at its worst.	pro	
covid-19 and the flu spread through similar conduits.	1_1.4.5.	Covid-19 and the flu spread through similar conduits.	con	Both Covid-19 and the flu can spread when people touch a surface with viruses on it.	Both the flu and Covid-19 spread via droplets or smaller virus particles.	Transmission from children to adults is common with the flu, but not with Covid-19 (p. 2).	Animals can act as reservoirs of both the influenza virus and Covid-19.
both covid-19 and the flu can spread when people touch a surface with viruses on it.	1_1.4.5.1.	Both Covid-19 and the flu can spread when people touch a surface with viruses on it.	con	Covid-19 can persist on surfaces for hours to days, similar to the time-frame that the influenza virus persists for.	Multiple studies(People can be infected with SARS-CoV-2 through contact with surfaces. However, based on available epidemiological data and studies of environmental transmission factors, surface transmission is not the main route by which SARS-CoV-2 spreads, and the risk is considered to be low.) have found that surface transmission is uncommon for Covid-19.
covid-19 can persist on surfaces for hours to days, similar to the time-frame that the influenza virus persists for.	1_1.4.5.1.1.	Covid-19 can persist on surfaces for hours to days, similar to the time-frame that the influenza virus persists for.	con	These results are often produced in laboratory settings(However, experimental conditions on both porous and non-porous surfaces do not necessarily reflect real-world conditions, such as initial virus amount (e.g., viral load in respiratory droplets) and factors that can remove or degrade the virus, such as ventilation and changing environmental conditions) that do not replicate real world situations.
these results are often produced in laboratory settings(however, experimental conditions on both porous and non-porous surfaces do not necessarily reflect real-world conditions, such as initial virus amount (e.g., viral load in respiratory droplets) and factors that can remove or degrade the virus, such as ventilation and changing environmental conditions) that do not replicate real world situations.	1_1.4.5.1.1.1.	These results are often produced in laboratory settings(However, experimental conditions on both porous and non-porous surfaces do not necessarily reflect real-world conditions, such as initial virus amount (e.g., viral load in respiratory droplets) and factors that can remove or degrade the virus, such as ventilation and changing environmental conditions) that do not replicate real world situations.	pro	One study found(On the basis of the levels of RNA contamination and how often people touched surfaces such as doorknobs and buttons at pedestrian crossings, the team estimated that the risk of infection from touching a contaminated surface is less than 5 in 10,000 — lower than estimates for SARS-CoV-2 infection through aerosols, and lower than surface-transmission risk for influenza or norovirus.) that the risk of surface transmission for Covid-19 is lower than that of influenza.
one study found(on the basis of the levels of rna contamination and how often people touched surfaces such as doorknobs and buttons at pedestrian crossings, the team estimated that the risk of infection from touching a contaminated surface is less than 5 in 10,000 — lower than estimates for sars-cov-2 infection through aerosols, and lower than surface-transmission risk for influenza or norovirus.) that the risk of surface transmission for covid-19 is lower than that of influenza.	1_1.4.5.1.1.1.1.	One study found(On the basis of the levels of RNA contamination and how often people touched surfaces such as doorknobs and buttons at pedestrian crossings, the team estimated that the risk of infection from touching a contaminated surface is less than 5 in 10,000 — lower than estimates for SARS-CoV-2 infection through aerosols, and lower than surface-transmission risk for influenza or norovirus.) that the risk of surface transmission for Covid-19 is lower than that of influenza.	pro	
multiple studies(people can be infected with sars-cov-2 through contact with surfaces. however, based on available epidemiological data and studies of environmental transmission factors, surface transmission is not the main route by which sars-cov-2 spreads, and the risk is considered to be low.) have found that surface transmission is uncommon for covid-19.	1_1.4.5.1.2.	Multiple studies(People can be infected with SARS-CoV-2 through contact with surfaces. However, based on available epidemiological data and studies of environmental transmission factors, surface transmission is not the main route by which SARS-CoV-2 spreads, and the risk is considered to be low.) have found that surface transmission is uncommon for Covid-19.	pro	Some scientists have warned(“It’s become clear that transmission by inhalation of aerosols — the microscopic droplets — is an important if not dominant mode of transmission,” says Marr, who studies airborne disease transmission. Excessive attention on making surfaces pristine takes up limited time and resources that would be better spent on ventilation or the decontamination of the air that people breathe, she says.) that excessive attention to disinfecting surfaces draws resources away from improving ventilation and other measures that more effectively curtail the virus' spread.
some scientists have warned(“it’s become clear that transmission by inhalation of aerosols — the microscopic droplets — is an important if not dominant mode of transmission,” says marr, who studies airborne disease transmission. excessive attention on making surfaces pristine takes up limited time and resources that would be better spent on ventilation or the decontamination of the air that people breathe, she says.) that excessive attention to disinfecting surfaces draws resources away from improving ventilation and other measures that more effectively curtail the virus' spread.	1_1.4.5.1.2.1.	Some scientists have warned(“It’s become clear that transmission by inhalation of aerosols — the microscopic droplets — is an important if not dominant mode of transmission,” says Marr, who studies airborne disease transmission. Excessive attention on making surfaces pristine takes up limited time and resources that would be better spent on ventilation or the decontamination of the air that people breathe, she says.) that excessive attention to disinfecting surfaces draws resources away from improving ventilation and other measures that more effectively curtail the virus' spread.	pro	
both the flu and covid-19 spread via droplets or smaller virus particles.	1_1.4.5.2.	Both the flu and Covid-19 spread via droplets or smaller virus particles.	con	Covid-19 and flu viral particles can linger in the air and infect a person that inhales them.
covid-19 and flu viral particles can linger in the air and infect a person that inhales them.	1_1.4.5.2.1.	Covid-19 and flu viral particles can linger in the air and infect a person that inhales them.	con	
transmission from children to adults is common with the flu, but not with covid-19 (p. 2).	1_1.4.5.3.	Transmission from children to adults is common with the flu, but not with Covid-19 (p. 2).	pro	Studies have found that children are much less likely to contract and spread Covid-19.	According to a collection of international family clusters(A collection of international family clusters found that children were not likely to be the index case in households, only being responsible for around 10% of clusters.9 Data from Guangzhou have supported this, finding an even lower rate of children as index cases in households at 5%.), children were only responsible for 10% of household clusters.
studies have found that children are much less likely to contract and spread covid-19.	1_1.4.5.3.1.	Studies have found that children are much less likely to contract and spread Covid-19.	pro	
according to a collection of international family clusters(a collection of international family clusters found that children were not likely to be the index case in households, only being responsible for around 10% of clusters.9 data from guangzhou have supported this, finding an even lower rate of children as index cases in households at 5%.), children were only responsible for 10% of household clusters.	1_1.4.5.3.2.	According to a collection of international family clusters(A collection of international family clusters found that children were not likely to be the index case in households, only being responsible for around 10% of clusters.9 Data from Guangzhou have supported this, finding an even lower rate of children as index cases in households at 5%.), children were only responsible for 10% of household clusters.	pro	
animals can act as reservoirs of both the influenza virus and covid-19.	1_1.4.5.4.	Animals can act as reservoirs of both the influenza virus and Covid-19.	con	Humans, avian, and swine are three important hosts for the influenza virus.	Bats are considered to be the probable source of Covid-19 virus.
humans, avian, and swine are three important hosts for the influenza virus.	1_1.4.5.4.1.	Humans, avian, and swine are three important hosts for the influenza virus.	con	
bats are considered to be the probable source of covid-19 virus.	1_1.4.5.4.2.	Bats are considered to be the probable source of Covid-19 virus.	con	
the time and conditions that are most conducive for the transmission of the virus are similar for both covid-19 and influenza.	1_1.4.6.	The time and conditions that are most conducive for the transmission of the virus are similar for both Covid-19 and influenza.	con	A study found that both Covid-19 and the flu can be transmitted by paucisymptomatic patients, albeit at a reduced rate.	Both Covid-19 and the flu are most contagious when people are symptomatic.	The spread of both Covid-19 and influenza show similar patterns of seasonality.	Such commonalities are to be expected, given that both Covid-19 and influenza are caused by viruses that tend to thrive and transmit in similarly specific conditions.
a study found that both covid-19 and the flu can be transmitted by paucisymptomatic patients, albeit at a reduced rate.	1_1.4.6.1.	A study found that both Covid-19 and the flu can be transmitted by paucisymptomatic patients, albeit at a reduced rate.	con	Asymptomatic Covid-19 patients are 42% less likely to transmit the virus than symptomatic patients. In comparison, asymptomatic flu patients rarely spread the influenza virus.
asymptomatic covid-19 patients are 42% less likely to transmit the virus than symptomatic patients. in comparison, asymptomatic flu patients rarely spread the influenza virus.	1_1.4.6.1.1.	Asymptomatic Covid-19 patients are 42% less likely to transmit the virus than symptomatic patients. In comparison, asymptomatic flu patients rarely spread the influenza virus.	pro	
both covid-19 and the flu are most contagious when people are symptomatic.	1_1.4.6.2.	Both Covid-19 and the flu are most contagious when people are symptomatic.	con	Covid-19 is significantly more contagious even if it is only contagious only when people are symptomatic.	While Covid-19 is most contagious while someone has symptoms, it's significantly contagious 1-3 days prior to someone developing symptoms.
covid-19 is significantly more contagious even if it is only contagious only when people are symptomatic.	1_1.4.6.2.1.	Covid-19 is significantly more contagious even if it is only contagious only when people are symptomatic.	pro	The new coronavirus has an R0 of roughly 2 to 2.5, meaning that each new person spreads the disease to about 2.2 people on average. That makes Covid-19 more contagious than the seasonal flu (R0 of about 1.3.
the new coronavirus has an r0 of roughly 2 to 2.5, meaning that each new person spreads the disease to about 2.2 people on average. that makes covid-19 more contagious than the seasonal flu (r0 of about 1.3.	1_1.4.6.2.1.1.	The new coronavirus has an R0 of roughly 2 to 2.5, meaning that each new person spreads the disease to about 2.2 people on average. That makes Covid-19 more contagious than the seasonal flu (R0 of about 1.3.	pro	
while covid-19 is most contagious while someone has symptoms, it's significantly contagious 1-3 days prior to someone developing symptoms.	1_1.4.6.2.2.	While Covid-19 is most contagious while someone has symptoms, it's significantly contagious 1-3 days prior to someone developing symptoms.	pro	
the spread of both covid-19 and influenza show similar patterns of seasonality.	1_1.4.6.3.	The spread of both Covid-19 and influenza show similar patterns of seasonality.	con	In areas with more pronounced influenza seasonality, Covid-19 epidemics have followed trends similar to those seen for the flu.	In some regions, Covid-19 has seen resurgence outside of the traditional influenza season.
in areas with more pronounced influenza seasonality, covid-19 epidemics have followed trends similar to those seen for the flu.	1_1.4.6.3.1.	In areas with more pronounced influenza seasonality, Covid-19 epidemics have followed trends similar to those seen for the flu.	con	
in some regions, covid-19 has seen resurgence outside of the traditional influenza season.	1_1.4.6.3.2.	In some regions, Covid-19 has seen resurgence outside of the traditional influenza season.	pro	The US saw its second wave peak in July 2020, which is outside the traditional influenza season.
the us saw its second wave peak in july 2020, which is outside the traditional influenza season.	1_1.4.6.3.2.1.	The US saw its second wave peak in July 2020, which is outside the traditional influenza season.	pro	
such commonalities are to be expected, given that both covid-19 and influenza are caused by viruses that tend to thrive and transmit in similarly specific conditions.	1_1.4.6.4.	Such commonalities are to be expected, given that both Covid-19 and influenza are caused by viruses that tend to thrive and transmit in similarly specific conditions.	pro	
as of march 2021, there were fewer treatment options available for covid-19 infections than for flu infections.	1_1.5.	As of March 2021, there were fewer treatment options available for Covid-19 infections than for flu infections.	pro	Coronaviruses are not new and have been around for a long time. Hence it is possible to estimate their risks and develop treatment plans to minimize their impact.	As of 6th May 2020, 7 companies were working on developing a treatment for Covid-19.	The emergence of mutant strains of Covid-19 have made it harder for treatments (such as vaccines) to keep up with the virus.	Unlike for Covid-19, there are antiviral drugs that help reduce illness caused by a flu infection.	Unlike for Covid-19, a vaccine for flu infections is readily available each year.	Treatments for the flu and Covid-19 both help manage the symptoms of the infection as opposed to treating the underlying cause.	Early evidence suggests that tocilizumab could be effective as a treatment for Covid-19 infection.
coronaviruses are not new and have been around for a long time. hence it is possible to estimate their risks and develop treatment plans to minimize their impact.	1_1.5.1.	Coronaviruses are not new and have been around for a long time. Hence it is possible to estimate their risks and develop treatment plans to minimize their impact.	con	The potential risk can vary greatly within a group of viruses.	For decades, scientists have been aware of mutating coronaviruses that make people sick. They have developed tools and monitoring systems that enable them to react effectively when viruses threaten the public health.	Event 201 from the World Economic Forum and a study from the Robert Koch Institute simulated similar scenarios and predicted that an event like the Covid-19 pandemic would occur in the near future.	Before Covid-19, scientists were concerned about the outbreak of an airborne zoonotic virus. That means they were able to assess its potential risks.	Even if experts possess this knowledge, if ordinary people do not understand or trust scientific data, it is unlikely that the recommended measures will be adhered to and the spread of the disease limited.	Covid-19 is a relatively new member of the family of coronaviruses. Its risks cannot be estimated effectively.	Among many potential coronaviruses that can infect humans, only six species of coronaviruses are known.	Even if it is possible to minimize the impact of new viruses, some of them can still be more dangerous than the flu in terms of the rate of morbidity and mortality they can cause.
the potential risk can vary greatly within a group of viruses.	1_1.5.1.1.	The potential risk can vary greatly within a group of viruses.	pro	That the risk varies does not imply that rough estimates are not possible. Flu symptoms are caused by a number of different mutating viruses - nevertheless, the risk of the flu is estimated on a yearly basis.	Some other members of the family of coronaviruses - 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1 - cause unremarkable common colds. Yet other members are even more deadly than SARS-Cov-2, such as MERS-CoV and Covid-19.	Death rates vary greatly among different coronaviruses.
that the risk varies does not imply that rough estimates are not possible. flu symptoms are caused by a number of different mutating viruses - nevertheless, the risk of the flu is estimated on a yearly basis.	1_1.5.1.1.1.	That the risk varies does not imply that rough estimates are not possible. Flu symptoms are caused by a number of different mutating viruses - nevertheless, the risk of the flu is estimated on a yearly basis.	con	
some other members of the family of coronaviruses - 229e, nl63, oc43, and hku1 - cause unremarkable common colds. yet other members are even more deadly than sars-cov-2, such as mers-cov and covid-19.	1_1.5.1.1.2.	Some other members of the family of coronaviruses - 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1 - cause unremarkable common colds. Yet other members are even more deadly than SARS-Cov-2, such as MERS-CoV and Covid-19.	pro	
death rates vary greatly among different coronaviruses.	1_1.5.1.1.3.	Death rates vary greatly among different coronaviruses.	pro	SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV have a mortality rate of 6.76%, 9.6%, and 35.5% respectively.
sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov have a mortality rate of 6.76%, 9.6%, and 35.5% respectively.	1_1.5.1.1.3.1.	SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV have a mortality rate of 6.76%, 9.6%, and 35.5% respectively.	pro	
for decades, scientists have been aware of mutating coronaviruses that make people sick. they have developed tools and monitoring systems that enable them to react effectively when viruses threaten the public health.	1_1.5.1.2.	For decades, scientists have been aware of mutating coronaviruses that make people sick. They have developed tools and monitoring systems that enable them to react effectively when viruses threaten the public health.	con	Contact tracing failed(In England, tracers fail to get in touch with one in eight people who test positive for COVID-19; 18% of those who are reached provide no details for close contacts. In some regions of the United States, more than half of people who test positive provide no details of contacts when asked.) in many developed countries during the pandemic.	China's virus monitoring system detected Covid-19 in Wuhan. Yet, this was insufficient in stopping the global spread of the virus.
contact tracing failed(in england, tracers fail to get in touch with one in eight people who test positive for covid-19; 18% of those who are reached provide no details for close contacts. in some regions of the united states, more than half of people who test positive provide no details of contacts when asked.) in many developed countries during the pandemic.	1_1.5.1.2.1.	Contact tracing failed(In England, tracers fail to get in touch with one in eight people who test positive for COVID-19; 18% of those who are reached provide no details for close contacts. In some regions of the United States, more than half of people who test positive provide no details of contacts when asked.) in many developed countries during the pandemic.	pro	
china's virus monitoring system detected covid-19 in wuhan. yet, this was insufficient in stopping the global spread of the virus.	1_1.5.1.2.2.	China's virus monitoring system detected Covid-19 in Wuhan. Yet, this was insufficient in stopping the global spread of the virus.	pro	
event 201 from the world economic forum and a study from the robert koch institute simulated similar scenarios and predicted that an event like the covid-19 pandemic would occur in the near future.	1_1.5.1.3.	Event 201 from the World Economic Forum and a study from the Robert Koch Institute simulated similar scenarios and predicted that an event like the Covid-19 pandemic would occur in the near future.	con	These warnings failed to prepare the world for the Covid-19 pandemic, as many countries were ill-equipped to combat the disease when it emerged.
these warnings failed to prepare the world for the covid-19 pandemic, as many countries were ill-equipped to combat the disease when it emerged.	1_1.5.1.3.1.	These warnings failed to prepare the world for the Covid-19 pandemic, as many countries were ill-equipped to combat the disease when it emerged.	pro	The US did not replenish(But after H1N1 subsided, neither Congress, the Obama White House, nor the subsequent Trump administration moved to substantially refill the stockpile — leaving a depleted stash of the N95 masks that would prove essential in protecting health care workers in the fight against COVID.) its stockpile of N95 masks after the H1N1 pandemic, resulting in a shortage that hurt healthcare workers early in the Covid-19 pandemic.	The UK government had a confused and contradictory response to the pandemic, resulting in a surge of cases and deaths.
the us did not replenish(but after h1n1 subsided, neither congress, the obama white house, nor the subsequent trump administration moved to substantially refill the stockpile — leaving a depleted stash of the n95 masks that would prove essential in protecting health care workers in the fight against covid.) its stockpile of n95 masks after the h1n1 pandemic, resulting in a shortage that hurt healthcare workers early in the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.5.1.3.1.1.	The US did not replenish(But after H1N1 subsided, neither Congress, the Obama White House, nor the subsequent Trump administration moved to substantially refill the stockpile — leaving a depleted stash of the N95 masks that would prove essential in protecting health care workers in the fight against COVID.) its stockpile of N95 masks after the H1N1 pandemic, resulting in a shortage that hurt healthcare workers early in the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	
the uk government had a confused and contradictory response to the pandemic, resulting in a surge of cases and deaths.	1_1.5.1.3.1.2.	The UK government had a confused and contradictory response to the pandemic, resulting in a surge of cases and deaths.	pro	
before covid-19, scientists were concerned about the outbreak of an airborne zoonotic virus. that means they were able to assess its potential risks.	1_1.5.1.4.	Before Covid-19, scientists were concerned about the outbreak of an airborne zoonotic virus. That means they were able to assess its potential risks.	con	After the threat posed by SARS was contained, many investors stopped funding research into coronaviruses. Due to the lack of funds, it was difficult for scientists to analyze the possible risks associated with them.	Even with strong monitoring systems, it is not always possible to estimate the severity of infections caused by an unknown coronavirus.
after the threat posed by sars was contained, many investors stopped funding research into coronaviruses. due to the lack of funds, it was difficult for scientists to analyze the possible risks associated with them.	1_1.5.1.4.1.	After the threat posed by SARS was contained, many investors stopped funding research into coronaviruses. Due to the lack of funds, it was difficult for scientists to analyze the possible risks associated with them.	pro	
even with strong monitoring systems, it is not always possible to estimate the severity of infections caused by an unknown coronavirus.	1_1.5.1.4.2.	Even with strong monitoring systems, it is not always possible to estimate the severity of infections caused by an unknown coronavirus.	pro	
even if experts possess this knowledge, if ordinary people do not understand or trust scientific data, it is unlikely that the recommended measures will be adhered to and the spread of the disease limited.	1_1.5.1.5.	Even if experts possess this knowledge, if ordinary people do not understand or trust scientific data, it is unlikely that the recommended measures will be adhered to and the spread of the disease limited.	pro	One study found that only half of American adults wore masks when in close contact with others outside their home.	Ignorance and mistrust of science can have negative societal implications.	After procuring the relevant knowledge, public health officials can make this information more digestible so that the public can access and understand it.	Measures can be taken to combat misinformation.	The misinformation that Covid-19 is no more dangerous than the flu is likely to undermine measures that curb the spread of infections.
ignorance and mistrust of science can have negative societal implications.	1_1.5.1.5.2.	Ignorance and mistrust of science can have negative societal implications.	pro	One survey found that one in four people in eastern Congo don't believe that Ebola is real, hindering efforts to combat the disease during outbreaks.	Protests against Covid-19 health guidelines have been linked to extremist movements that express wider distrust of governments and institutions.
one survey found that one in four people in eastern congo don't believe that ebola is real, hindering efforts to combat the disease during outbreaks.	1_1.5.1.5.2.1.	One survey found that one in four people in eastern Congo don't believe that Ebola is real, hindering efforts to combat the disease during outbreaks.	pro	
protests against covid-19 health guidelines have been linked to extremist movements that express wider distrust of governments and institutions.	1_1.5.1.5.2.2.	Protests against Covid-19 health guidelines have been linked to extremist movements that express wider distrust of governments and institutions.	pro	
after procuring the relevant knowledge, public health officials can make this information more digestible so that the public can access and understand it.	1_1.5.1.5.3.	After procuring the relevant knowledge, public health officials can make this information more digestible so that the public can access and understand it.	con	At the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, many simple infographics were made to help the public understand the importance of simple social distancing measures.	To help people understand the proper way and the importance of washing one's hands, many child-friendly videos were made.
at the onset of the covid-19 pandemic, many simple infographics were made to help the public understand the importance of simple social distancing measures.	1_1.5.1.5.3.1.	At the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, many simple infographics were made to help the public understand the importance of simple social distancing measures.	con	
to help people understand the proper way and the importance of washing one's hands, many child-friendly videos were made.	1_1.5.1.5.3.2.	To help people understand the proper way and the importance of washing one's hands, many child-friendly videos were made.	con	
measures can be taken to combat misinformation.	1_1.5.1.5.4.	Measures can be taken to combat misinformation.	con	A coalition comprising of members such as WHO and UNESCO has been formed to fight misinformation regarding Covid-19.	Social media can be used to fight misinformation.	It is significantly more challenging to combat misinformation about a new disease like Covid-19 than about existing diseases like the flu.
a coalition comprising of members such as who and unesco has been formed to fight misinformation regarding covid-19.	1_1.5.1.5.4.1.	A coalition comprising of members such as WHO and UNESCO has been formed to fight misinformation regarding Covid-19.	con	
social media can be used to fight misinformation.	1_1.5.1.5.4.2.	Social media can be used to fight misinformation.	con	
it is significantly more challenging to combat misinformation about a new disease like covid-19 than about existing diseases like the flu.	1_1.5.1.5.4.3.	It is significantly more challenging to combat misinformation about a new disease like Covid-19 than about existing diseases like the flu.	pro	
the misinformation that covid-19 is no more dangerous than the flu is likely to undermine measures that curb the spread of infections.	1_1.5.1.5.5.	The misinformation that Covid-19 is no more dangerous than the flu is likely to undermine measures that curb the spread of infections.	pro	
covid-19 is a relatively new member of the family of coronaviruses. its risks cannot be estimated effectively.	1_1.5.1.6.	Covid-19 is a relatively new member of the family of coronaviruses. Its risks cannot be estimated effectively.	pro	Viruses are constantly evolving. Sometimes new strains appear, some more virulent than others. That our measuring techniques and virology knowledge has evolved, does not necessarily imply that something surprising is happening now.	Event 201 from the World Economic Forum and a study from the Robert Koch Institute simulated similar scenarios and predicted that an event like the Covid-19 pandemic would occur in the near future.	Some other members of the family of coronaviruses - 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1 - cause unremarkable common colds. Yet other members are even more deadly than SARS-Cov-2, such as MERS-CoV and Covid-19.	SARS had a genetic mutation that explained the extent of its spread in humans. Covid-19 does not have such a mutation and still spreads faster among humans than SARS.
viruses are constantly evolving. sometimes new strains appear, some more virulent than others. that our measuring techniques and virology knowledge has evolved, does not necessarily imply that something surprising is happening now.	1_1.5.1.6.1.	Viruses are constantly evolving. Sometimes new strains appear, some more virulent than others. That our measuring techniques and virology knowledge has evolved, does not necessarily imply that something surprising is happening now.	con	
sars had a genetic mutation that explained the extent of its spread in humans. covid-19 does not have such a mutation and still spreads faster among humans than sars.	1_1.5.1.6.4.	SARS had a genetic mutation that explained the extent of its spread in humans. Covid-19 does not have such a mutation and still spreads faster among humans than SARS.	pro	
among many potential coronaviruses that can infect humans, only six species of coronaviruses are known.	1_1.5.1.7.	Among many potential coronaviruses that can infect humans, only six species of coronaviruses are known.	pro	
even if it is possible to minimize the impact of new viruses, some of them can still be more dangerous than the flu in terms of the rate of morbidity and mortality they can cause.	1_1.5.1.8.	Even if it is possible to minimize the impact of new viruses, some of them can still be more dangerous than the flu in terms of the rate of morbidity and mortality they can cause.	pro	
as of 6th may 2020, 7 companies were working on developing a treatment for covid-19.	1_1.5.2.	As of 6th May 2020, 7 companies were working on developing a treatment for Covid-19.	con	
the emergence of mutant strains of covid-19 have made it harder for treatments (such as vaccines) to keep up with the virus.	1_1.5.3.	The emergence of mutant strains of Covid-19 have made it harder for treatments (such as vaccines) to keep up with the virus.	pro	There are concerns that some vaccines might not be very effective against certain new strains of the Covid-19 virus.	The Covid-19 virus seems to mutate much slower than the seasonal flu virus.	Once the basic groundwork for the vaccine has been established, it is possible to quickly and effectively adapt the vaccine so that it is effective against the new variants.
there are concerns that some vaccines might not be very effective against certain new strains of the covid-19 virus.	1_1.5.3.1.	There are concerns that some vaccines might not be very effective against certain new strains of the Covid-19 virus.	pro	Some pharmacutical companies are already responding to this scenario and developing booster shots that target the new variants.	The Pfizer vaccine had reduced effectiveness against Covid-19 variants, particularly the South African variant.	The efficacy of Johnson & Johnson dropped from 72 to 64% when tested against the South African variant.	Novavax’s vaccine's efficacy dropped from 89% to 49% when tested against the South African variant.	While less effective against the new variants, the vaccines will still provide some degree of protection against these strains of Covid-19.
some pharmacutical companies are already responding to this scenario and developing booster shots that target the new variants.	1_1.5.3.1.1.	Some pharmacutical companies are already responding to this scenario and developing booster shots that target the new variants.	con	
the pfizer vaccine had reduced effectiveness against covid-19 variants, particularly the south african variant.	1_1.5.3.1.2.	The Pfizer vaccine had reduced effectiveness against Covid-19 variants, particularly the South African variant.	pro	
the efficacy of johnson & johnson dropped from 72 to 64% when tested against the south african variant.	1_1.5.3.1.3.	The efficacy of Johnson & Johnson dropped from 72 to 64% when tested against the South African variant.	pro	
novavax’s vaccine's efficacy dropped from 89% to 49% when tested against the south african variant.	1_1.5.3.1.4.	Novavax’s vaccine's efficacy dropped from 89% to 49% when tested against the South African variant.	pro	
while less effective against the new variants, the vaccines will still provide some degree of protection against these strains of covid-19.	1_1.5.3.1.5.	While less effective against the new variants, the vaccines will still provide some degree of protection against these strains of Covid-19.	con	The vaccines that are currently in use can still protect individuals, albeit in a reduced capacity, from the new Covid-19 variants.
the vaccines that are currently in use can still protect individuals, albeit in a reduced capacity, from the new covid-19 variants.	1_1.5.3.1.5.1.	The vaccines that are currently in use can still protect individuals, albeit in a reduced capacity, from the new Covid-19 variants.	con	
the covid-19 virus seems to mutate much slower than the seasonal flu virus.	1_1.5.3.2.	The Covid-19 virus seems to mutate much slower than the seasonal flu virus.	con	It is estimated that Covid-19 accumulates an additional mutation once every 11 days. The influenza virus has a mutation rate of 2.0 × 10^−6 and 0.6 × 10^−6 mutations per site per infectious cycle, with one replication cycle lasting 6 hours.	Covid-19's lower mutation rate is the result of the presence of basic proofreading machinery that helps prevent errors from being integrated.
it is estimated that covid-19 accumulates an additional mutation once every 11 days. the influenza virus has a mutation rate of 2.0 × 10^−6 and 0.6 × 10^−6 mutations per site per infectious cycle, with one replication cycle lasting 6 hours.	1_1.5.3.2.1.	It is estimated that Covid-19 accumulates an additional mutation once every 11 days. The influenza virus has a mutation rate of 2.0 × 10^−6 and 0.6 × 10^−6 mutations per site per infectious cycle, with one replication cycle lasting 6 hours.	con	
covid-19's lower mutation rate is the result of the presence of basic proofreading machinery that helps prevent errors from being integrated.	1_1.5.3.2.2.	Covid-19's lower mutation rate is the result of the presence of basic proofreading machinery that helps prevent errors from being integrated.	con	
once the basic groundwork for the vaccine has been established, it is possible to quickly and effectively adapt the vaccine so that it is effective against the new variants.	1_1.5.3.3.	Once the basic groundwork for the vaccine has been established, it is possible to quickly and effectively adapt the vaccine so that it is effective against the new variants.	con	Some pharmacutical companies are already responding to this scenario and developing booster shots that target the new variants.	Legislative provisions are being made to accelerate the approval of adapted vaccines.
legislative provisions are being made to accelerate the approval of adapted vaccines.	1_1.5.3.3.2.	Legislative provisions are being made to accelerate the approval of adapted vaccines.	con	
unlike for covid-19, there are antiviral drugs that help reduce illness caused by a flu infection.	1_1.5.4.	Unlike for Covid-19, there are antiviral drugs that help reduce illness caused by a flu infection.	pro	Antiviral drugs reduce symptoms from flu infection by 1–2 days.	In March 2021, Pfizer began clinical development of an antiviral pill against Covid-19.	A study in March 2021 showed that the antiviral drug remdesivir was associated with faster clinical improvement in hospitalized Covid-19 patients.	Adamantanes and neuraminidase inhibitors are two approved drugs for controlling the flu.
antiviral drugs reduce symptoms from flu infection by 1–2 days.	1_1.5.4.1.	Antiviral drugs reduce symptoms from flu infection by 1–2 days.	pro	
in march 2021, pfizer began clinical development of an antiviral pill against covid-19.	1_1.5.4.2.	In March 2021, Pfizer began clinical development of an antiviral pill against Covid-19.	con	Pfizer's CEO believes that the pill could be available by the end of 2021.
pfizer's ceo believes that the pill could be available by the end of 2021.	1_1.5.4.2.1.	Pfizer's CEO believes that the pill could be available by the end of 2021.	con	
a study in march 2021 showed that the antiviral drug remdesivir was associated with faster clinical improvement in hospitalized covid-19 patients.	1_1.5.4.3.	A study in March 2021 showed that the antiviral drug remdesivir was associated with faster clinical improvement in hospitalized Covid-19 patients.	con	Remdesivir was approved by the FDA in America in October 2020 and was shown(The median time to recovery from COVID-19 was 10 days for the Veklury \[remdsivir\] group compared to 15 days for the placebo group, a statistically significant difference.) to reduce hospital stays for Covid-19 patients by up to five days.	In April 2021, there was a remdesivir shortage in many countries as new waves of infection occured.
remdesivir was approved by the fda in america in october 2020 and was shown(the median time to recovery from covid-19 was 10 days for the veklury \[remdsivir\] group compared to 15 days for the placebo group, a statistically significant difference.) to reduce hospital stays for covid-19 patients by up to five days.	1_1.5.4.3.1.	Remdesivir was approved by the FDA in America in October 2020 and was shown(The median time to recovery from COVID-19 was 10 days for the Veklury \[remdsivir\] group compared to 15 days for the placebo group, a statistically significant difference.) to reduce hospital stays for Covid-19 patients by up to five days.	con	
in april 2021, there was a remdesivir shortage in many countries as new waves of infection occured.	1_1.5.4.3.2.	In April 2021, there was a remdesivir shortage in many countries as new waves of infection occured.	pro	
adamantanes and neuraminidase inhibitors are two approved drugs for controlling the flu.	1_1.5.4.4.	Adamantanes and neuraminidase inhibitors are two approved drugs for controlling the flu.	pro	
unlike for covid-19, a vaccine for flu infections is readily available each year.	1_1.5.5.	Unlike for Covid-19, a vaccine for flu infections is readily available each year.	pro	The flu vaccine has an effectiveness between 40-60%.	A number of effective vaccines have been developed against Covid-19.
the flu vaccine has an effectiveness between 40-60%.	1_1.5.5.1.	The flu vaccine has an effectiveness between 40-60%.	pro	
a number of effective vaccines have been developed against covid-19.	1_1.5.5.2.	A number of effective vaccines have been developed against Covid-19.	con	AstraZeneca has an effectiveness of 76%.	Pfizer has an effectiveness of 94-97%.	There are concerns that some vaccines might not be very effective against certain new strains of the Covid-19 virus.	Sputnik V has an efficacy of 91.6%.	It is possible that the vaccine against influenza can provide protective effects against severe Covid‐19 infections.	Pfizer's CEO has said he thinks it is likely that people will need booster shots annually for the vaccines to remain effective. Therefore, the existing vaccines aren't effective at eliminating the disease longterm. The problem won't be solved with just one shot - it will need to be an ongoing process.	People are more likely to be hesitant towards getting vaccinated against Covid-19 than against influenza.	There are more institutional measures mandating vaccinations against influenza(\[A\]t least 16 states require influenza or hepatitis B vaccinations for postsecondary education.) than against Covid-19.	Once enough people are vaccinated, Covid-19 will no longer be more dangerous than the flu.
astrazeneca has an effectiveness of 76%.	1_1.5.5.2.1.	AstraZeneca has an effectiveness of 76%.	con	
pfizer has an effectiveness of 94-97%.	1_1.5.5.2.2.	Pfizer has an effectiveness of 94-97%.	con	
sputnik v has an efficacy of 91.6%.	1_1.5.5.2.4.	Sputnik V has an efficacy of 91.6%.	con	
it is possible that the vaccine against influenza can provide protective effects against severe covid‐19 infections.	1_1.5.5.2.5.	It is possible that the vaccine against influenza can provide protective effects against severe Covid‐19 infections.	con	
pfizer's ceo has said he thinks it is likely that people will need booster shots annually for the vaccines to remain effective. therefore, the existing vaccines aren't effective at eliminating the disease longterm. the problem won't be solved with just one shot - it will need to be an ongoing process.	1_1.5.5.2.6.	Pfizer's CEO has said he thinks it is likely that people will need booster shots annually for the vaccines to remain effective. Therefore, the existing vaccines aren't effective at eliminating the disease longterm. The problem won't be solved with just one shot - it will need to be an ongoing process.	pro	A flu shot is needed every season(A flu vaccine is needed every season for two reasons. First, a person’s immune protection from vaccination declines over time, so an annual vaccine is needed for optimal protection. Second, because flu viruses are constantly changing, flu vaccines may be updated from one season to the next to protect against the viruses that research suggests may be most common during the upcoming flu season.) for one to be adequately protected from contracting the influenza virus.
a flu shot is needed every season(a flu vaccine is needed every season for two reasons. first, a person’s immune protection from vaccination declines over time, so an annual vaccine is needed for optimal protection. second, because flu viruses are constantly changing, flu vaccines may be updated from one season to the next to protect against the viruses that research suggests may be most common during the upcoming flu season.) for one to be adequately protected from contracting the influenza virus.	1_1.5.5.2.6.1.	A flu shot is needed every season(A flu vaccine is needed every season for two reasons. First, a person’s immune protection from vaccination declines over time, so an annual vaccine is needed for optimal protection. Second, because flu viruses are constantly changing, flu vaccines may be updated from one season to the next to protect against the viruses that research suggests may be most common during the upcoming flu season.) for one to be adequately protected from contracting the influenza virus.	con	
people are more likely to be hesitant towards getting vaccinated against covid-19 than against influenza.	1_1.5.5.2.7.	People are more likely to be hesitant towards getting vaccinated against Covid-19 than against influenza.	pro	Studies have found that the spreading of anti-vaccination propaganda is a multi-million dollar industry comprised of highly sophisticated misinformation strategies.	Approximately 50%(just under half of adults in the U.S. surveyed in December said they were very likely to get vaccinated, according to a new study from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.) of US adults say they are "very likely" to get vaccinated for Covid-19. This is roughly equal to the 48.4%(Overall, among adults ≥18 years, flu vaccination coverage was 48.4%, 3.1 percentage points higher than coverage during the 2018–19 season) of US adults who got the influenza vaccine in 2018-2019.
studies have found that the spreading of anti-vaccination propaganda is a multi-million dollar industry comprised of highly sophisticated misinformation strategies.	1_1.5.5.2.7.1.	Studies have found that the spreading of anti-vaccination propaganda is a multi-million dollar industry comprised of highly sophisticated misinformation strategies.	pro	Countries like France(Research from BBC Monitoring found that the number of followers of pages sharing extreme anti-vaccine content in French grew in 2020, from 3.2m to nearly 4.1m likes.) have been bombarded with anti-vaccination propaganda on social media.	Anti-vaccination propaganda is likely to effect people's sentiments on getting vaccinated against the influenza virus as well.
countries like france(research from bbc monitoring found that the number of followers of pages sharing extreme anti-vaccine content in french grew in 2020, from 3.2m to nearly 4.1m likes.) have been bombarded with anti-vaccination propaganda on social media.	1_1.5.5.2.7.1.1.	Countries like France(Research from BBC Monitoring found that the number of followers of pages sharing extreme anti-vaccine content in French grew in 2020, from 3.2m to nearly 4.1m likes.) have been bombarded with anti-vaccination propaganda on social media.	pro	
anti-vaccination propaganda is likely to effect people's sentiments on getting vaccinated against the influenza virus as well.	1_1.5.5.2.7.1.2.	Anti-vaccination propaganda is likely to effect people's sentiments on getting vaccinated against the influenza virus as well.	con	
approximately 50%(just under half of adults in the u.s. surveyed in december said they were very likely to get vaccinated, according to a new study from the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention.) of us adults say they are "very likely" to get vaccinated for covid-19. this is roughly equal to the 48.4%(overall, among adults ≥18 years, flu vaccination coverage was 48.4%, 3.1 percentage points higher than coverage during the 2018–19 season) of us adults who got the influenza vaccine in 2018-2019.	1_1.5.5.2.7.2.	Approximately 50%(just under half of adults in the U.S. surveyed in December said they were very likely to get vaccinated, according to a new study from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.) of US adults say they are "very likely" to get vaccinated for Covid-19. This is roughly equal to the 48.4%(Overall, among adults ≥18 years, flu vaccination coverage was 48.4%, 3.1 percentage points higher than coverage during the 2018–19 season) of US adults who got the influenza vaccine in 2018-2019.	con	
there are more institutional measures mandating vaccinations against influenza(\[a\]t least 16 states require influenza or hepatitis b vaccinations for postsecondary education.) than against covid-19.	1_1.5.5.2.8.	There are more institutional measures mandating vaccinations against influenza(\[A\]t least 16 states require influenza or hepatitis B vaccinations for postsecondary education.) than against Covid-19.	pro	
once enough people are vaccinated, covid-19 will no longer be more dangerous than the flu.	1_1.5.5.2.9.	Once enough people are vaccinated, Covid-19 will no longer be more dangerous than the flu.	con	Following successful vaccinations, monthly mortality from Covid-19 may start to resemble that of the flu in an average year.	Death rates are likely to reduce dramatically after the vaccine is rolled out and administered.
following successful vaccinations, monthly mortality from covid-19 may start to resemble that of the flu in an average year.	1_1.5.5.2.9.1.	Following successful vaccinations, monthly mortality from Covid-19 may start to resemble that of the flu in an average year.	con	
death rates are likely to reduce dramatically after the vaccine is rolled out and administered.	1_1.5.5.2.9.2.	Death rates are likely to reduce dramatically after the vaccine is rolled out and administered.	con	Vaccination reduces the risk of severe infection among people aged over 80s, who are most at risk of mortality from Covid-19.	By March 2021, all the vaccines available were shown to reduce mortality from Covid-19 infections.	It is unlikely that the world population will be vaccinated against Covid-19 before the end of 2022.	Even if vaccination reduces the mortality rate, a huge portion of the world population is currently not vaccinated and therefore Covid-19 infections continue to have high death rates.
vaccination reduces the risk of severe infection among people aged over 80s, who are most at risk of mortality from covid-19.	1_1.5.5.2.9.2.1.	Vaccination reduces the risk of severe infection among people aged over 80s, who are most at risk of mortality from Covid-19.	con	
by march 2021, all the vaccines available were shown to reduce mortality from covid-19 infections.	1_1.5.5.2.9.2.2.	By March 2021, all the vaccines available were shown to reduce mortality from Covid-19 infections.	con	
it is unlikely that the world population will be vaccinated against covid-19 before the end of 2022.	1_1.5.5.2.9.2.3.	It is unlikely that the world population will be vaccinated against Covid-19 before the end of 2022.	pro	
even if vaccination reduces the mortality rate, a huge portion of the world population is currently not vaccinated and therefore covid-19 infections continue to have high death rates.	1_1.5.5.2.9.2.4.	Even if vaccination reduces the mortality rate, a huge portion of the world population is currently not vaccinated and therefore Covid-19 infections continue to have high death rates.	pro	By the end of April 2021, only around 7.2% of the world population was vaccinated against Covid-19.
by the end of april 2021, only around 7.2% of the world population was vaccinated against covid-19.	1_1.5.5.2.9.2.4.1.	By the end of April 2021, only around 7.2% of the world population was vaccinated against Covid-19.	pro	
treatments for the flu and covid-19 both help manage the symptoms of the infection as opposed to treating the underlying cause.	1_1.5.6.	Treatments for the flu and Covid-19 both help manage the symptoms of the infection as opposed to treating the underlying cause.	con	
early evidence suggests that tocilizumab could be effective as a treatment for covid-19 infection.	1_1.5.7.	Early evidence suggests that tocilizumab could be effective as a treatment for Covid-19 infection.	con	As of February 2021, the use of tocilizumab is considered experimental, and in need of further trials to validate its purported efficacy.	Tocilizumab is only recommended for people already suffering from extreme effects(tocilizumab, when added to corticosteroid therapy, offers a modest mortality benefit in certain patients with COVID-19 who are severely ill and exhibit rapid clinical deterioration with increasing oxygen needs and a significant inflammatory response to the virus. However, the Panel found it challenging to define the specific population(s) that would benefit from this intervention.) of the disease, so it is not useful for the majority of the population.
as of february 2021, the use of tocilizumab is considered experimental, and in need of further trials to validate its purported efficacy.	1_1.5.7.1.	As of February 2021, the use of tocilizumab is considered experimental, and in need of further trials to validate its purported efficacy.	pro	
tocilizumab is only recommended for people already suffering from extreme effects(tocilizumab, when added to corticosteroid therapy, offers a modest mortality benefit in certain patients with covid-19 who are severely ill and exhibit rapid clinical deterioration with increasing oxygen needs and a significant inflammatory response to the virus. however, the panel found it challenging to define the specific population(s) that would benefit from this intervention.) of the disease, so it is not useful for the majority of the population.	1_1.5.7.2.	Tocilizumab is only recommended for people already suffering from extreme effects(tocilizumab, when added to corticosteroid therapy, offers a modest mortality benefit in certain patients with COVID-19 who are severely ill and exhibit rapid clinical deterioration with increasing oxygen needs and a significant inflammatory response to the virus. However, the Panel found it challenging to define the specific population(s) that would benefit from this intervention.) of the disease, so it is not useful for the majority of the population.	pro	
covid-19 and the flu are the same symptomatically.	1_1.6.	Covid-19 and the flu are the same symptomatically.	con	Even though Covid-19 shares many of the same basic symptoms as the flu, these symptoms are relatively more severe in Covid-19.	Both Covid-19 and the flu involve fatigue, fever and sore throat as symptoms.	A person infected with Covid-19 can take longer to develop symptoms than they would if they had the flu.	Muscle pain and body aches are symptoms of both Covid-19 and flu infections.	Covid-19 and influenza viruses use almost identical strategies to escape the host's antiviral responses.	Both influenza and Covid-19 similarly impact patients with inflammatory bowel disease.	It is possible to diagnostically differentiate between Covid-19 and influenza infections. This shows that there are differences in how symptoms manifest in these two infections.	Data comparing patients with Covid-19 infection to patients with influenza in the hospital setting is limited.	The groups at risk for complications from H1N1 influenza and Covid-19 have significant overlap.	There are many symptoms unique to Covid-19 infections.
even though covid-19 shares many of the same basic symptoms as the flu, these symptoms are relatively more severe in covid-19.	1_1.6.1.	Even though Covid-19 shares many of the same basic symptoms as the flu, these symptoms are relatively more severe in Covid-19.	pro	For decades, scientists have been aware of mutating coronaviruses that make people sick. They have developed tools and monitoring systems that enable them to react effectively when viruses threaten the public health.
both covid-19 and the flu involve fatigue, fever and sore throat as symptoms.	1_1.6.2.	Both Covid-19 and the flu involve fatigue, fever and sore throat as symptoms.	con	Fever is caused due to an increase in inflammatory cytokine levels brought on by anti-viral innate immune responses in both influenza and Covid-19 infections.	Sore throat is a more prominent symptom in flu than in Covid-19 infections.
fever is caused due to an increase in inflammatory cytokine levels brought on by anti-viral innate immune responses in both influenza and covid-19 infections.	1_1.6.2.1.	Fever is caused due to an increase in inflammatory cytokine levels brought on by anti-viral innate immune responses in both influenza and Covid-19 infections.	con	
sore throat is a more prominent symptom in flu than in covid-19 infections.	1_1.6.2.2.	Sore throat is a more prominent symptom in flu than in Covid-19 infections.	pro	
a person infected with covid-19 can take longer to develop symptoms than they would if they had the flu.	1_1.6.3.	A person infected with Covid-19 can take longer to develop symptoms than they would if they had the flu.	pro	Flu symptoms appear 1 to 4 days after infection whereas Covid-19 symptoms usually appear 5 days after infection.
flu symptoms appear 1 to 4 days after infection whereas covid-19 symptoms usually appear 5 days after infection.	1_1.6.3.1.	Flu symptoms appear 1 to 4 days after infection whereas Covid-19 symptoms usually appear 5 days after infection.	pro	
muscle pain and body aches are symptoms of both covid-19 and flu infections.	1_1.6.4.	Muscle pain and body aches are symptoms of both Covid-19 and flu infections.	con	
covid-19 and influenza viruses use almost identical strategies to escape the host's antiviral responses.	1_1.6.5.	Covid-19 and influenza viruses use almost identical strategies to escape the host's antiviral responses.	con	
both influenza and covid-19 similarly impact patients with inflammatory bowel disease.	1_1.6.6.	Both influenza and Covid-19 similarly impact patients with inflammatory bowel disease.	con	
it is possible to diagnostically differentiate between covid-19 and influenza infections. this shows that there are differences in how symptoms manifest in these two infections.	1_1.6.7.	It is possible to diagnostically differentiate between Covid-19 and influenza infections. This shows that there are differences in how symptoms manifest in these two infections.	pro	Some cases of co-infection(from section 6.3) with both Covid-19 and influenza viruses have made diagnosis challenging.	Bilateral GGOs and consolidations, observed through chest X-rays, can help to differentiate Covid-19 from influenza.	Covid-19 patients show a higher level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) than patients with influenza.	Unlike in the flu, the most commonly reported laboratory abnormalities in Covid-19 include lymphopenia and prolonged prothrombin time (PT).	There are concerns that diagnosis will become difficult when the Covid-19 pandemic overlaps with influenza epidemics.	There are significant differences in laboratory parameters between hospitalized Covid-19 and influenza patients.
some cases of co-infection(from section 6.3) with both covid-19 and influenza viruses have made diagnosis challenging.	1_1.6.7.1.	Some cases of co-infection(from section 6.3) with both Covid-19 and influenza viruses have made diagnosis challenging.	con	Radiographic analysis showed no significant difference between patients with Covid-19 and co-infected patients.	As of March 2021, we are able to diagnose flu with more specificity than Covid-19.
radiographic analysis showed no significant difference between patients with covid-19 and co-infected patients.	1_1.6.7.1.1.	Radiographic analysis showed no significant difference between patients with Covid-19 and co-infected patients.	con	
as of march 2021, we are able to diagnose flu with more specificity than covid-19.	1_1.6.7.1.2.	As of March 2021, we are able to diagnose flu with more specificity than Covid-19.	con	
bilateral ggos and consolidations, observed through chest x-rays, can help to differentiate covid-19 from influenza.	1_1.6.7.2.	Bilateral GGOs and consolidations, observed through chest X-rays, can help to differentiate Covid-19 from influenza.	pro	
covid-19 patients show a higher level of lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) than patients with influenza.	1_1.6.7.3.	Covid-19 patients show a higher level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) than patients with influenza.	pro	
unlike in the flu, the most commonly reported laboratory abnormalities in covid-19 include lymphopenia and prolonged prothrombin time (pt).	1_1.6.7.4.	Unlike in the flu, the most commonly reported laboratory abnormalities in Covid-19 include lymphopenia and prolonged prothrombin time (PT).	pro	
there are concerns that diagnosis will become difficult when the covid-19 pandemic overlaps with influenza epidemics.	1_1.6.7.5.	There are concerns that diagnosis will become difficult when the Covid-19 pandemic overlaps with influenza epidemics.	con	
there are significant differences in laboratory parameters between hospitalized covid-19 and influenza patients.	1_1.6.7.6.	There are significant differences in laboratory parameters between hospitalized Covid-19 and influenza patients.	pro	
data comparing patients with covid-19 infection to patients with influenza in the hospital setting is limited.	1_1.6.8.	Data comparing patients with Covid-19 infection to patients with influenza in the hospital setting is limited.	pro	
the groups at risk for complications from h1n1 influenza and covid-19 have significant overlap.	1_1.6.9.	The groups at risk for complications from H1N1 influenza and Covid-19 have significant overlap.	con	It appears that children are more likely to develop severe symptoms when infected with the flu than with Covid-19.	The overall incidence and severity of both Covid-19 and influenza is higher among male patients than among female patients.
it appears that children are more likely to develop severe symptoms when infected with the flu than with covid-19.	1_1.6.9.1.	It appears that children are more likely to develop severe symptoms when infected with the flu than with Covid-19.	pro	Children under the age of 5 were at risk for serious illness from H1N1 influenza virus but not from Covid-19.
children under the age of 5 were at risk for serious illness from h1n1 influenza virus but not from covid-19.	1_1.6.9.1.1.	Children under the age of 5 were at risk for serious illness from H1N1 influenza virus but not from Covid-19.	pro	
the overall incidence and severity of both covid-19 and influenza is higher among male patients than among female patients.	1_1.6.9.2.	The overall incidence and severity of both Covid-19 and influenza is higher among male patients than among female patients.	con	Mortality rates between genders are inconsistent around the world.
mortality rates between genders are inconsistent around the world.	1_1.6.9.2.1.	Mortality rates between genders are inconsistent around the world.	pro	While men have a higher mortality rate overall, women(In India, the COVID-19 case fatality rate among men is 2·9% and 3·3% among women.3\nCase fatality rates in Nepal, Vietnam, and Slovenia are also higher among women than men.) in countries such as India, Nepal, Vietnam, and Slovenia are more likely to die of Covid-19.
while men have a higher mortality rate overall, women(in india, the covid-19 case fatality rate among men is 2·9% and 3·3% among women.3\ncase fatality rates in nepal, vietnam, and slovenia are also higher among women than men.) in countries such as india, nepal, vietnam, and slovenia are more likely to die of covid-19.	1_1.6.9.2.1.1.	While men have a higher mortality rate overall, women(In India, the COVID-19 case fatality rate among men is 2·9% and 3·3% among women.3\nCase fatality rates in Nepal, Vietnam, and Slovenia are also higher among women than men.) in countries such as India, Nepal, Vietnam, and Slovenia are more likely to die of Covid-19.	pro	
there are many symptoms unique to covid-19 infections.	1_1.6.10.	There are many symptoms unique to Covid-19 infections.	pro	Covid-19 can cause damage to organ systems, such as the heart and kidneys, and there has been a significant link between Covid-19 and strokes. The regular flu does not show these symptoms.	Unlike the flu, symptoms of Covid-19 include a loss of smell and taste.	Unlike the flu, Covid-19 can cause shortness of breath and chronic lung problems.	Non-productive dry cough(Table 1) is a symptom seen in Covid-19 infections but not in flu infections.	Unlike with the flu, skin rash and discolouration of toes or fingers are symptoms of Covid-19 infection.
covid-19 can cause damage to organ systems, such as the heart and kidneys, and there has been a significant link between covid-19 and strokes. the regular flu does not show these symptoms.	1_1.6.10.1.	Covid-19 can cause damage to organ systems, such as the heart and kidneys, and there has been a significant link between Covid-19 and strokes. The regular flu does not show these symptoms.	pro	A study in December 2020 showed that, compared with the flu, Covid-19 was associated with an increased risk of extra-pulmonary organ dysfunction and death.	Both infections can lead to multi-organ failures.
a study in december 2020 showed that, compared with the flu, covid-19 was associated with an increased risk of extra-pulmonary organ dysfunction and death.	1_1.6.10.1.1.	A study in December 2020 showed that, compared with the flu, Covid-19 was associated with an increased risk of extra-pulmonary organ dysfunction and death.	pro	
both infections can lead to multi-organ failures.	1_1.6.10.1.2.	Both infections can lead to multi-organ failures.	con	
unlike the flu, symptoms of covid-19 include a loss of smell and taste.	1_1.6.10.2.	Unlike the flu, symptoms of Covid-19 include a loss of smell and taste.	pro	
unlike the flu, covid-19 can cause shortness of breath and chronic lung problems.	1_1.6.10.3.	Unlike the flu, Covid-19 can cause shortness of breath and chronic lung problems.	pro	Covid-19 shares many clinical symptoms with pneumonia, which is caused by the influenza virus.
covid-19 shares many clinical symptoms with pneumonia, which is caused by the influenza virus.	1_1.6.10.3.1.	Covid-19 shares many clinical symptoms with pneumonia, which is caused by the influenza virus.	con	
non-productive dry cough(table 1) is a symptom seen in covid-19 infections but not in flu infections.	1_1.6.10.4.	Non-productive dry cough(Table 1) is a symptom seen in Covid-19 infections but not in flu infections.	pro	
unlike with the flu, skin rash and discolouration of toes or fingers are symptoms of covid-19 infection.	1_1.6.10.5.	Unlike with the flu, skin rash and discolouration of toes or fingers are symptoms of Covid-19 infection.	pro	
compared to the flu, the death rate for covid-19 patients is very high.	1_1.8.	Compared to the flu, the death rate for Covid-19 patients is very high.	pro	The total number of deaths caused by Covid-19 is well above the number of deaths caused by the influenza virus.	The death rate for Covid-19 among those aged 60+ is comparable to more serious diseases like SARS and typhoid.	Higher mortality of Covid-19("Another potential explanation for the higher mortality of COVID-19 is that the sudden influx of patients over a short period of time created medical structural constraints, and care teams were led to prioritise patients based on clinical status and prognosis. This hypothesis is supported by the lower rate of transfer to ICU in patients older than 80 years with COVID-19, which strongly contrasts with the higher mortality in these same patients."\n\nFrom Discussion, paragraph 4.) could be due to medical constraints created by the sudden influx of patients over a short period of time.	Millions more people recover from Covid-19 than die from it.	The death rate for Covid-19 is not globally consistent.	Death rate for Covid-19 cannot be accurately estimated due to inadequacies in data.	Among immunocompromised patients, those with Covid-19 had a higher mortality compared to those with influenza.	Death rates are likely to reduce dramatically after the vaccine is rolled out and administered.	Covid-19 outbreaks also cause indirect deaths by using up medical resources that would have been used to treat other fatal conditions.
the total number of deaths caused by covid-19 is well above the number of deaths caused by the influenza virus.	1_1.8.1.	The total number of deaths caused by Covid-19 is well above the number of deaths caused by the influenza virus.	pro	An analysis in March 2021 showed excess mortality associated with Covid-19 relative to the flu.	346,000 people died in the US due to Covid-19 in 2020. In comparison, the 2019-2020 flu season caused 22,000 deaths in the US.	The mortality rate for Covid-19 is 3.1%, while the fatality rate for the influenza virus is typically estimated to be 0.1%	Excess deaths caused by Covid-19 are comparable to those caused by influenza during the severe phases of influenza epidemics.
an analysis in march 2021 showed excess mortality associated with covid-19 relative to the flu.	1_1.8.1.1.	An analysis in March 2021 showed excess mortality associated with Covid-19 relative to the flu.	pro	Excess mortality associated with Covid-19 relative to flu, with an age-standardised mortality, is equivalent to 2:8.
excess mortality associated with covid-19 relative to flu, with an age-standardised mortality, is equivalent to 2:8.	1_1.8.1.1.1.	Excess mortality associated with Covid-19 relative to flu, with an age-standardised mortality, is equivalent to 2:8.	pro	
346,000 people died in the us due to covid-19 in 2020. in comparison, the 2019-2020 flu season caused 22,000 deaths in the us.	1_1.8.1.2.	346,000 people died in the US due to Covid-19 in 2020. In comparison, the 2019-2020 flu season caused 22,000 deaths in the US.	pro	
the mortality rate for covid-19 is 3.1%, while the fatality rate for the influenza virus is typically estimated to be 0.1%	1_1.8.1.3.	The mortality rate for Covid-19 is 3.1%, while the fatality rate for the influenza virus is typically estimated to be 0.1%	pro	
excess deaths caused by covid-19 are comparable to those caused by influenza during the severe phases of influenza epidemics.	1_1.8.1.4.	Excess deaths caused by Covid-19 are comparable to those caused by influenza during the severe phases of influenza epidemics.	con	A study in 2021 estimated that, in the Netherlands, the number of excess deaths during Covid-19 epidemic weeks in 2020 were comparable to the excess deaths during the severe influenza epidemic of 2017-18.	Severe influenza epidemics are outliers and therefore mortality rates from such phases are not indicative of the usual mortality associated with influenza.	The 2018–19 seasonal influenza is not representative of all seasonal influenzas.
a study in 2021 estimated that, in the netherlands, the number of excess deaths during covid-19 epidemic weeks in 2020 were comparable to the excess deaths during the severe influenza epidemic of 2017-18.	1_1.8.1.4.1.	A study in 2021 estimated that, in the Netherlands, the number of excess deaths during Covid-19 epidemic weeks in 2020 were comparable to the excess deaths during the severe influenza epidemic of 2017-18.	con	
severe influenza epidemics are outliers and therefore mortality rates from such phases are not indicative of the usual mortality associated with influenza.	1_1.8.1.4.2.	Severe influenza epidemics are outliers and therefore mortality rates from such phases are not indicative of the usual mortality associated with influenza.	pro	
the 2018–19 seasonal influenza is not representative of all seasonal influenzas.	1_1.8.1.4.3.	The 2018–19 seasonal influenza is not representative of all seasonal influenzas.	pro	
the death rate for covid-19 among those aged 60+ is comparable to more serious diseases like sars and typhoid.	1_1.8.2.	The death rate for Covid-19 among those aged 60+ is comparable to more serious diseases like SARS and typhoid.	pro	By contrast, death rates for children and teenagers with Covid-19 are hundreds or thousands of times lower than for the elderly.
by contrast, death rates for children and teenagers with covid-19 are hundreds or thousands of times lower than for the elderly.	1_1.8.2.1.	By contrast, death rates for children and teenagers with Covid-19 are hundreds or thousands of times lower than for the elderly.	con	In-hospital mortality(In children, although the rate of hospitalisation for COVID-19 appears to be lower than for influenza, in-hospital mortality is higher) is higher among younger patients with Covid-19 than among younger patients with influenza, even though children with Covid-19 are at a lower risk of hospitalisation for Covid-19.
in-hospital mortality(in children, although the rate of hospitalisation for covid-19 appears to be lower than for influenza, in-hospital mortality is higher) is higher among younger patients with covid-19 than among younger patients with influenza, even though children with covid-19 are at a lower risk of hospitalisation for covid-19.	1_1.8.2.1.1.	In-hospital mortality(In children, although the rate of hospitalisation for COVID-19 appears to be lower than for influenza, in-hospital mortality is higher) is higher among younger patients with Covid-19 than among younger patients with influenza, even though children with Covid-19 are at a lower risk of hospitalisation for Covid-19.	pro	
higher mortality of covid-19("another potential explanation for the higher mortality of covid-19 is that the sudden influx of patients over a short period of time created medical structural constraints, and care teams were led to prioritise patients based on clinical status and prognosis. this hypothesis is supported by the lower rate of transfer to icu in patients older than 80 years with covid-19, which strongly contrasts with the higher mortality in these same patients."\n\nfrom discussion, paragraph 4.) could be due to medical constraints created by the sudden influx of patients over a short period of time.	1_1.8.3.	Higher mortality of Covid-19("Another potential explanation for the higher mortality of COVID-19 is that the sudden influx of patients over a short period of time created medical structural constraints, and care teams were led to prioritise patients based on clinical status and prognosis. This hypothesis is supported by the lower rate of transfer to ICU in patients older than 80 years with COVID-19, which strongly contrasts with the higher mortality in these same patients."\n\nFrom Discussion, paragraph 4.) could be due to medical constraints created by the sudden influx of patients over a short period of time.	con	Covid-19 cases would be less likely to overwhelm health systems if the systems weren't already dysfunctional in many countries.	Higher mortality rate among Covid-19 patients is seen even among those hospitalized in well-equipped units.	Even within the same medical constraints, peaks in flu infections do not result in higher mortality in the same way as peaks in Covid-19 infections do.
higher mortality rate among covid-19 patients is seen even among those hospitalized in well-equipped units.	1_1.8.3.2.	Higher mortality rate among Covid-19 patients is seen even among those hospitalized in well-equipped units.	pro	
even within the same medical constraints, peaks in flu infections do not result in higher mortality in the same way as peaks in covid-19 infections do.	1_1.8.3.3.	Even within the same medical constraints, peaks in flu infections do not result in higher mortality in the same way as peaks in Covid-19 infections do.	pro	
millions more people recover from covid-19 than die from it.	1_1.8.4.	Millions more people recover from Covid-19 than die from it.	con	Having more people recover from a disease than die from it is not an indication of its severity.	Even if Covid-19 infection is mild for most people, when absolute numbers are considered, it is quite severe for many.
having more people recover from a disease than die from it is not an indication of its severity.	1_1.8.4.1.	Having more people recover from a disease than die from it is not an indication of its severity.	pro	Ebola, one of the most serious known diseases, has a death rate of around 50%(The average EVD case fatality rate is around 50%.).	If the transmission rate of an infection is high, even if the recovery rate is high, the small proportion of people that do die from Covid-19 will be high in absolute numbers.
ebola, one of the most serious known diseases, has a death rate of around 50%(the average evd case fatality rate is around 50%.).	1_1.8.4.1.1.	Ebola, one of the most serious known diseases, has a death rate of around 50%(The average EVD case fatality rate is around 50%.).	pro	
if the transmission rate of an infection is high, even if the recovery rate is high, the small proportion of people that do die from covid-19 will be high in absolute numbers.	1_1.8.4.1.2.	If the transmission rate of an infection is high, even if the recovery rate is high, the small proportion of people that do die from Covid-19 will be high in absolute numbers.	pro	
even if covid-19 infection is mild for most people, when absolute numbers are considered, it is quite severe for many.	1_1.8.4.2.	Even if Covid-19 infection is mild for most people, when absolute numbers are considered, it is quite severe for many.	pro	
the death rate for covid-19 is not globally consistent.	1_1.8.5.	The death rate for Covid-19 is not globally consistent.	con	Countries like South Korea don't have a high death rate, despite having had a high infection rate early in the pandemic.	A lack of consistency between countries does not diminish the severity of the virus overall.	In Italy, more people died from Covid-19 infections during the first wave of the pandemic than from the flu.	Germany's Covid-19 death rate was low in March 2020.	Global variances are to be expected since different governments respond to the pandemic differently.	This is irrelevant since the death rate of Covid-19 is still higher than that of the flu.
countries like south korea don't have a high death rate, despite having had a high infection rate early in the pandemic.	1_1.8.5.1.	Countries like South Korea don't have a high death rate, despite having had a high infection rate early in the pandemic.	con	As treatment of serious cases progressed, South Korea's fatality rate rose. In May 2020, it was at a peak of 2.39%. This is because it takes a significant amount of time post-infection for the average Covid-19 fatality rate to actually rise.	Even given the lower death rates in South Korea, Covid-19 is still a far more dangerous disease than the flu.
as treatment of serious cases progressed, south korea's fatality rate rose. in may 2020, it was at a peak of 2.39%. this is because it takes a significant amount of time post-infection for the average covid-19 fatality rate to actually rise.	1_1.8.5.1.1.	As treatment of serious cases progressed, South Korea's fatality rate rose. In May 2020, it was at a peak of 2.39%. This is because it takes a significant amount of time post-infection for the average Covid-19 fatality rate to actually rise.	pro	
even given the lower death rates in south korea, covid-19 is still a far more dangerous disease than the flu.	1_1.8.5.1.2.	Even given the lower death rates in South Korea, Covid-19 is still a far more dangerous disease than the flu.	pro	The overall death rate in the US from 2019's flu season was about 0.1%, nearly 8.5 times lower than South Korea's Covid-19 death rate.
the overall death rate in the us from 2019's flu season was about 0.1%, nearly 8.5 times lower than south korea's covid-19 death rate.	1_1.8.5.1.2.1.	The overall death rate in the US from 2019's flu season was about 0.1%, nearly 8.5 times lower than South Korea's Covid-19 death rate.	pro	While both the flu and Covid-19 are more dangerous for older patients than younger patients, the flu's death rate of about 0.8% among patients 65 and older is about one-fourth that of South Korea's Covid-19 death rate of about 3.4% among patients 60 and older at the beginning of the pandemic.
while both the flu and covid-19 are more dangerous for older patients than younger patients, the flu's death rate of about 0.8% among patients 65 and older is about one-fourth that of south korea's covid-19 death rate of about 3.4% among patients 60 and older at the beginning of the pandemic.	1_1.8.5.1.2.1.1.	While both the flu and Covid-19 are more dangerous for older patients than younger patients, the flu's death rate of about 0.8% among patients 65 and older is about one-fourth that of South Korea's Covid-19 death rate of about 3.4% among patients 60 and older at the beginning of the pandemic.	pro	
a lack of consistency between countries does not diminish the severity of the virus overall.	1_1.8.5.2.	A lack of consistency between countries does not diminish the severity of the virus overall.	pro	Variation in death rates are likely due to a variety of factors, such as the quality of health care and the average age of the population.	Countries that responded with strong testing, tracing and isolating measures were able to reduce their death rates. However, such large scale measures entail that Covid-19 infection was severe.
variation in death rates are likely due to a variety of factors, such as the quality of health care and the average age of the population.	1_1.8.5.2.1.	Variation in death rates are likely due to a variety of factors, such as the quality of health care and the average age of the population.	pro	One study found that long term exposure to air pollution(The study, published in Cardiovascular Research \[1\] today (Tuesday), estimated that about 15% of deaths worldwide from COVID-19 could be attributed to long-term exposure to air pollution. In Europe the proportion was about 19%, in North America it was 17%, and in East Asia about 27%.) contributed to 15% of Covid-19 deaths worldwide and varied between regions.
one study found that long term exposure to air pollution(the study, published in cardiovascular research \[1\] today (tuesday), estimated that about 15% of deaths worldwide from covid-19 could be attributed to long-term exposure to air pollution. in europe the proportion was about 19%, in north america it was 17%, and in east asia about 27%.) contributed to 15% of covid-19 deaths worldwide and varied between regions.	1_1.8.5.2.1.1.	One study found that long term exposure to air pollution(The study, published in Cardiovascular Research \[1\] today (Tuesday), estimated that about 15% of deaths worldwide from COVID-19 could be attributed to long-term exposure to air pollution. In Europe the proportion was about 19%, in North America it was 17%, and in East Asia about 27%.) contributed to 15% of Covid-19 deaths worldwide and varied between regions.	pro	
countries that responded with strong testing, tracing and isolating measures were able to reduce their death rates. however, such large scale measures entail that covid-19 infection was severe.	1_1.8.5.2.2.	Countries that responded with strong testing, tracing and isolating measures were able to reduce their death rates. However, such large scale measures entail that Covid-19 infection was severe.	pro	
in italy, more people died from covid-19 infections during the first wave of the pandemic than from the flu.	1_1.8.5.3.	In Italy, more people died from Covid-19 infections during the first wave of the pandemic than from the flu.	con	The death toll from an outbreak of Covid-19 in Italy rose in by 427 to 3,405 in a single day. In comparison, between 2013 and 2017, influenza has killed, on average, approximately 38 people per day.	At the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic, only Italy (and Spain) were reporting extremely high death rates. They were the statistical outliers and did not represent the overall global condition.
the death toll from an outbreak of covid-19 in italy rose in by 427 to 3,405 in a single day. in comparison, between 2013 and 2017, influenza has killed, on average, approximately 38 people per day.	1_1.8.5.3.1.	The death toll from an outbreak of Covid-19 in Italy rose in by 427 to 3,405 in a single day. In comparison, between 2013 and 2017, influenza has killed, on average, approximately 38 people per day.	con	The Covid-19 Case Fataility Rate (CFR) is greater(The presentation of patients with COVID-19 and seasonal influenza requiring hospitalisation differs considerably. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is likely to have a higher potential for respiratory pathogenicity, leading to more respiratory complications and to higher mortality.) than the influenza CFR.
the covid-19 case fataility rate (cfr) is greater(the presentation of patients with covid-19 and seasonal influenza requiring hospitalisation differs considerably. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is likely to have a higher potential for respiratory pathogenicity, leading to more respiratory complications and to higher mortality.) than the influenza cfr.	1_1.8.5.3.1.1.	The Covid-19 Case Fataility Rate (CFR) is greater(The presentation of patients with COVID-19 and seasonal influenza requiring hospitalisation differs considerably. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is likely to have a higher potential for respiratory pathogenicity, leading to more respiratory complications and to higher mortality.) than the influenza CFR.	con	
at the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic, only italy (and spain) were reporting extremely high death rates. they were the statistical outliers and did not represent the overall global condition.	1_1.8.5.3.2.	At the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic, only Italy (and Spain) were reporting extremely high death rates. They were the statistical outliers and did not represent the overall global condition.	pro	They are the statistical outliers in large part because their uncontrolled outbreaks started earlier than elsewhere. They're better characterised as a leading indicator than an outlier.	Italy is knowingly an outlier in Europe when considering the influenza epidemic, where it is conceded that excess mortality rate is higher due to older population.	Taking the flu death average per day across several seasons and years gives a skewed picture and cannot be compared with a smaller Covid-19 time sample.	At the beginning of April 2020, Italy reported 13,000 Covid-19 deaths, followed by Spain at 9,000. Most countries did not report a similarly high rate at the time.
they are the statistical outliers in large part because their uncontrolled outbreaks started earlier than elsewhere. they're better characterised as a leading indicator than an outlier.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.	They are the statistical outliers in large part because their uncontrolled outbreaks started earlier than elsewhere. They're better characterised as a leading indicator than an outlier.	con	Germany had its first case on 27.01.2020, Spain had its first case on 31.01.2020, Italy had its first case on 31.01.2020. Despite Germany's early start, Germany's death rate was much lower at the beginning of the pandemic.	There are multiple other reasons why Spain and Italy could have been outliers early in the pandemic. For example, air pollution, quality of health infrastructure, age of population, consumption of anti-inflammatory drugs, population tested, test kits used, ways test kits were used, way of defining Covid-19 causality of death, etc.	Because Covid-19 fatalities are not immediate following infection, it takes time for cases that will ultimately be fatalities to show up in the death data.	Early in the pandemic, the fact that the Covid-19 related death rate doubled for Germany still discredits the idea of Italy and Spain as leading indicators, as 4.54% in Germany is far below the Italian and Spanish rates. Italy and Spain can still be considered as outliers and not leading indicators.	The fact that Covid-19 spread to every country in the world throughout 2020 indicates that Italy and Spain were leading indicators rather than outliers.
germany had its first case on 27.01.2020, spain had its first case on 31.01.2020, italy had its first case on 31.01.2020. despite germany's early start, germany's death rate was much lower at the beginning of the pandemic.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.1.	Germany had its first case on 27.01.2020, Spain had its first case on 31.01.2020, Italy had its first case on 31.01.2020. Despite Germany's early start, Germany's death rate was much lower at the beginning of the pandemic.	pro	Germany started testing early and aggressively, resulting in a significantly greater rate of case detection, and in turn, better isolation of infected cases. As a result, due to better detection of cases in Germany, Italy passed 1000 cases on 1 March, while Germany still had just over 100 cases. This is why, despite when first cases were reported, Italy's uncontrolled outbreak started earlier than Germany's.
germany started testing early and aggressively, resulting in a significantly greater rate of case detection, and in turn, better isolation of infected cases. as a result, due to better detection of cases in germany, italy passed 1000 cases on 1 march, while germany still had just over 100 cases. this is why, despite when first cases were reported, italy's uncontrolled outbreak started earlier than germany's.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.1.1.	Germany started testing early and aggressively, resulting in a significantly greater rate of case detection, and in turn, better isolation of infected cases. As a result, due to better detection of cases in Germany, Italy passed 1000 cases on 1 March, while Germany still had just over 100 cases. This is why, despite when first cases were reported, Italy's uncontrolled outbreak started earlier than Germany's.	con	According to the parent claim, after Germany, Italy had done the most testing as of March 2020, with about 200,000 tests. Italy has 20 million less people than Germany, and it has a high ratio of tested per million Italians.
according to the parent claim, after germany, italy had done the most testing as of march 2020, with about 200,000 tests. italy has 20 million less people than germany, and it has a high ratio of tested per million italians.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.1.1.1.	According to the parent claim, after Germany, Italy had done the most testing as of March 2020, with about 200,000 tests. Italy has 20 million less people than Germany, and it has a high ratio of tested per million Italians.	pro	
there are multiple other reasons why spain and italy could have been outliers early in the pandemic. for example, air pollution, quality of health infrastructure, age of population, consumption of anti-inflammatory drugs, population tested, test kits used, ways test kits were used, way of defining covid-19 causality of death, etc.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.2.	There are multiple other reasons why Spain and Italy could have been outliers early in the pandemic. For example, air pollution, quality of health infrastructure, age of population, consumption of anti-inflammatory drugs, population tested, test kits used, ways test kits were used, way of defining Covid-19 causality of death, etc.	pro	Variation in death rates are likely due to a variety of factors, such as the quality of health care and the average age of the population.
because covid-19 fatalities are not immediate following infection, it takes time for cases that will ultimately be fatalities to show up in the death data.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.3.	Because Covid-19 fatalities are not immediate following infection, it takes time for cases that will ultimately be fatalities to show up in the death data.	con	As treatment of serious cases progressed, South Korea's fatality rate rose. In May 2020, it was at a peak of 2.39%. This is because it takes a significant amount of time post-infection for the average Covid-19 fatality rate to actually rise.	In the week from March 30 to April 5, 2020, Germany's fatality rate nearly doubled, rising from 0.79% to 1.46%.
in the week from march 30 to april 5, 2020, germany's fatality rate nearly doubled, rising from 0.79% to 1.46%.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.3.2.	In the week from March 30 to April 5, 2020, Germany's fatality rate nearly doubled, rising from 0.79% to 1.46%.	con	
early in the pandemic, the fact that the covid-19 related death rate doubled for germany still discredits the idea of italy and spain as leading indicators, as 4.54% in germany is far below the italian and spanish rates. italy and spain can still be considered as outliers and not leading indicators.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.4.	Early in the pandemic, the fact that the Covid-19 related death rate doubled for Germany still discredits the idea of Italy and Spain as leading indicators, as 4.54% in Germany is far below the Italian and Spanish rates. Italy and Spain can still be considered as outliers and not leading indicators.	pro	
the fact that covid-19 spread to every country in the world throughout 2020 indicates that italy and spain were leading indicators rather than outliers.	1_1.8.5.3.2.1.5.	The fact that Covid-19 spread to every country in the world throughout 2020 indicates that Italy and Spain were leading indicators rather than outliers.	con	
italy is knowingly an outlier in europe when considering the influenza epidemic, where it is conceded that excess mortality rate is higher due to older population.	1_1.8.5.3.2.2.	Italy is knowingly an outlier in Europe when considering the influenza epidemic, where it is conceded that excess mortality rate is higher due to older population.	pro	
taking the flu death average per day across several seasons and years gives a skewed picture and cannot be compared with a smaller covid-19 time sample.	1_1.8.5.3.2.3.	Taking the flu death average per day across several seasons and years gives a skewed picture and cannot be compared with a smaller Covid-19 time sample.	con	
at the beginning of april 2020, italy reported 13,000 covid-19 deaths, followed by spain at 9,000. most countries did not report a similarly high rate at the time.	1_1.8.5.3.2.4.	At the beginning of April 2020, Italy reported 13,000 Covid-19 deaths, followed by Spain at 9,000. Most countries did not report a similarly high rate at the time.	pro	
germany's covid-19 death rate was low in march 2020.	1_1.8.5.4.	Germany's Covid-19 death rate was low in March 2020.	con	As of April 2021, Germany's death rate from Covid-19 was lower than many of its European neighbors.
as of april 2021, germany's death rate from covid-19 was lower than many of its european neighbors.	1_1.8.5.4.1.	As of April 2021, Germany's death rate from Covid-19 was lower than many of its European neighbors.	con	
global variances are to be expected since different governments respond to the pandemic differently.	1_1.8.5.5.	Global variances are to be expected since different governments respond to the pandemic differently.	pro	According to the results of a preprint, the type of policies enacted by governments impacted the number of deaths by Covid-19.
according to the results of a preprint, the type of policies enacted by governments impacted the number of deaths by covid-19.	1_1.8.5.5.1.	According to the results of a preprint, the type of policies enacted by governments impacted the number of deaths by Covid-19.	pro	
this is irrelevant since the death rate of covid-19 is still higher than that of the flu.	1_1.8.5.6.	This is irrelevant since the death rate of Covid-19 is still higher than that of the flu.	pro	
death rate for covid-19 cannot be accurately estimated due to inadequacies in data.	1_1.8.6.	Death rate for Covid-19 cannot be accurately estimated due to inadequacies in data.	con	Since the virus emerged, numerous estimations of Covid-19 death rates have been made, becoming increasingly accurate over time.	Not all people who are infected with the Covid-19 virus are identified. This makes it challenging to calculate the actual fatality rate.	Even without accurate rates, the possible range of the fatality rate strongly indicates that Covid-19 is deadlier than the seasonal flu.
since the virus emerged, numerous estimations of covid-19 death rates have been made, becoming increasingly accurate over time.	1_1.8.6.1.	Since the virus emerged, numerous estimations of Covid-19 death rates have been made, becoming increasingly accurate over time.	pro	
not all people who are infected with the covid-19 virus are identified. this makes it challenging to calculate the actual fatality rate.	1_1.8.6.2.	Not all people who are infected with the Covid-19 virus are identified. This makes it challenging to calculate the actual fatality rate.	con	The case fatality rate of Covid-19 is a function of how many people are tested. Since the extent of testing varies from one country to another, it is difficult to estimate the actual global fatality rate.	Insufficient tracking makes it challenging to estimate the extent of Covid-19 reinfections.	Inadequate testing suggests that the actual fatality rate is higher than reported and not lower. This further entails that it is deadlier than the flu .
the case fatality rate of covid-19 is a function of how many people are tested. since the extent of testing varies from one country to another, it is difficult to estimate the actual global fatality rate.	1_1.8.6.2.1.	The case fatality rate of Covid-19 is a function of how many people are tested. Since the extent of testing varies from one country to another, it is difficult to estimate the actual global fatality rate.	con	Accurate fatality rates for Covid-19 will only be possible after widespread antibody testing.	Asymptomatic Covid-19 patients are in most cases not tested; therefore, the current calculated death rates could be wrong.	In the US, Covid-19 testing has not been as rigorous or as consistent across states as it has been in other countries.
accurate fatality rates for covid-19 will only be possible after widespread antibody testing.	1_1.8.6.2.1.1.	Accurate fatality rates for Covid-19 will only be possible after widespread antibody testing.	con	Antibody testing can give a more accurate estimate of how many people were infected in the past and able to recover.
antibody testing can give a more accurate estimate of how many people were infected in the past and able to recover.	1_1.8.6.2.1.1.1.	Antibody testing can give a more accurate estimate of how many people were infected in the past and able to recover.	con	
asymptomatic covid-19 patients are in most cases not tested; therefore, the current calculated death rates could be wrong.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.	Asymptomatic Covid-19 patients are in most cases not tested; therefore, the current calculated death rates could be wrong.	con	When sample populations are tested and monitored over an extended period, as many as 28% of cases(among nursing home residents, the proportion was 54% (42% to 65%) of which 28% (13% to 50%) remained asymptomatic through follow-up) were asymptomatic for the entire period of illness.	It is plausible that a country that is mostly only testing severely ill people will show a higher case fatality rate than a country testing more widely.	The actual Covid-19 death rate must be estimated based on a calculated excess mortality rate, as not all Covid-19 infected persons are being tested, but only a selected subset of them.
when sample populations are tested and monitored over an extended period, as many as 28% of cases(among nursing home residents, the proportion was 54% (42% to 65%) of which 28% (13% to 50%) remained asymptomatic through follow-up) were asymptomatic for the entire period of illness.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.1.	When sample populations are tested and monitored over an extended period, as many as 28% of cases(among nursing home residents, the proportion was 54% (42% to 65%) of which 28% (13% to 50%) remained asymptomatic through follow-up) were asymptomatic for the entire period of illness.	con	The number of asymptomatic cases cannot be seriously estimated at the beginning of a pandemic as a statistical study would be necessary by having a representative sample of the population tested once the pandemic is over. That way, it is easier to assess who had it without knowing it, who had it and did have the symptoms, and who had it and most probably died from it.
the number of asymptomatic cases cannot be seriously estimated at the beginning of a pandemic as a statistical study would be necessary by having a representative sample of the population tested once the pandemic is over. that way, it is easier to assess who had it without knowing it, who had it and did have the symptoms, and who had it and most probably died from it.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.1.1.	The number of asymptomatic cases cannot be seriously estimated at the beginning of a pandemic as a statistical study would be necessary by having a representative sample of the population tested once the pandemic is over. That way, it is easier to assess who had it without knowing it, who had it and did have the symptoms, and who had it and most probably died from it.	pro	
it is plausible that a country that is mostly only testing severely ill people will show a higher case fatality rate than a country testing more widely.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.2.	It is plausible that a country that is mostly only testing severely ill people will show a higher case fatality rate than a country testing more widely.	con	
the actual covid-19 death rate must be estimated based on a calculated excess mortality rate, as not all covid-19 infected persons are being tested, but only a selected subset of them.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.	The actual Covid-19 death rate must be estimated based on a calculated excess mortality rate, as not all Covid-19 infected persons are being tested, but only a selected subset of them.	con	Based on early reporting figures and adjustments for reporting delays, various countries with significant outbreaks are already seeing significant excess mortality.
based on early reporting figures and adjustments for reporting delays, various countries with significant outbreaks are already seeing significant excess mortality.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.	Based on early reporting figures and adjustments for reporting delays, various countries with significant outbreaks are already seeing significant excess mortality.	pro	Indeed, based on monitoring of excess mortality in Italy, death figures may be significantly underestimating the number of deaths due to Covid-19.	The death count in Spain was found to be 70% higher than official records showed from March to May 2020.	An interpretation of the observed excess mortality numbers should also be cautiously done, as the quarantine measures do have an impact on the mortality rate.	Throughout the pandemic, countries around the world experienced above average excess mortality.
indeed, based on monitoring of excess mortality in italy, death figures may be significantly underestimating the number of deaths due to covid-19.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.1.	Indeed, based on monitoring of excess mortality in Italy, death figures may be significantly underestimating the number of deaths due to Covid-19.	pro	
the death count in spain was found to be 70% higher than official records showed from march to may 2020.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.2.	The death count in Spain was found to be 70% higher than official records showed from March to May 2020.	pro	
an interpretation of the observed excess mortality numbers should also be cautiously done, as the quarantine measures do have an impact on the mortality rate.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.	An interpretation of the observed excess mortality numbers should also be cautiously done, as the quarantine measures do have an impact on the mortality rate.	con	While there are reasonable concerns about long-term increases in mortality due to economic deprivation and reduction in physical fitness or mental health, those are things that would impact long-term mortality, and not contribute to excess mortality in any given week.	In the short term, aggressive isolation measures are likely to reduce deaths from non-Covid causes as well.	Financial distress, domestic violence, suicide, and the consequences of isolation are proven to increase the mortality risk.
while there are reasonable concerns about long-term increases in mortality due to economic deprivation and reduction in physical fitness or mental health, those are things that would impact long-term mortality, and not contribute to excess mortality in any given week.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.1.	While there are reasonable concerns about long-term increases in mortality due to economic deprivation and reduction in physical fitness or mental health, those are things that would impact long-term mortality, and not contribute to excess mortality in any given week.	pro	The impact of long-term negative effects of lockdowns (depression, obesity, poverty, etc.) on mortality rates are also possibly offset by reduction of mortality due to crime and suicide during lockdowns.
the impact of long-term negative effects of lockdowns (depression, obesity, poverty, etc.) on mortality rates are also possibly offset by reduction of mortality due to crime and suicide during lockdowns.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.1.1.	The impact of long-term negative effects of lockdowns (depression, obesity, poverty, etc.) on mortality rates are also possibly offset by reduction of mortality due to crime and suicide during lockdowns.	pro	
in the short term, aggressive isolation measures are likely to reduce deaths from non-covid causes as well.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.2.	In the short term, aggressive isolation measures are likely to reduce deaths from non-Covid causes as well.	pro	People aren't driving or walking near busy roads, thereby preventing traffic accidents.	Other communicable diseases are also prevented from spreading when taking precautions against Covid-19 transmission.
people aren't driving or walking near busy roads, thereby preventing traffic accidents.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.2.1.	People aren't driving or walking near busy roads, thereby preventing traffic accidents.	pro	One study found that even though Americans are driving less, traffic fatalities actually increased as more people drove recklessly on emptier roads.
one study found that even though americans are driving less, traffic fatalities actually increased as more people drove recklessly on emptier roads.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.2.1.1.	One study found that even though Americans are driving less, traffic fatalities actually increased as more people drove recklessly on emptier roads.	con	
other communicable diseases are also prevented from spreading when taking precautions against covid-19 transmission.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.2.2.	Other communicable diseases are also prevented from spreading when taking precautions against Covid-19 transmission.	pro	One study found that influenza infection rates were "historically low" during the Covid-19 pandemic.
one study found that influenza infection rates were "historically low" during the covid-19 pandemic.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.2.2.1.	One study found that influenza infection rates were "historically low" during the Covid-19 pandemic.	pro	
financial distress, domestic violence, suicide, and the consequences of isolation are proven to increase the mortality risk.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.3.3.	Financial distress, domestic violence, suicide, and the consequences of isolation are proven to increase the mortality risk.	con	
throughout the pandemic, countries around the world experienced above average excess mortality.	1_1.8.6.2.1.2.3.1.4.	Throughout the pandemic, countries around the world experienced above average excess mortality.	pro	
in the us, covid-19 testing has not been as rigorous or as consistent across states as it has been in other countries.	1_1.8.6.2.1.3.	In the US, Covid-19 testing has not been as rigorous or as consistent across states as it has been in other countries.	con	This is a good reason to discount the US mortality data, but not a good reason to discount mortality data from countries with significantly better testing regimens, like South Korea.	As of March 26, 2021, the US has conducted nearly 400 million tests, more than any other country.	There have not been enough Covid-19 tests in the US. Therefore, many people have not been able to confirm or deny having been infected by the virus.
this is a good reason to discount the us mortality data, but not a good reason to discount mortality data from countries with significantly better testing regimens, like south korea.	1_1.8.6.2.1.3.1.	This is a good reason to discount the US mortality data, but not a good reason to discount mortality data from countries with significantly better testing regimens, like South Korea.	pro	
as of march 26, 2021, the us has conducted nearly 400 million tests, more than any other country.	1_1.8.6.2.1.3.2.	As of March 26, 2021, the US has conducted nearly 400 million tests, more than any other country.	pro	
there have not been enough covid-19 tests in the us. therefore, many people have not been able to confirm or deny having been infected by the virus.	1_1.8.6.2.1.3.3.	There have not been enough Covid-19 tests in the US. Therefore, many people have not been able to confirm or deny having been infected by the virus.	con	
insufficient tracking makes it challenging to estimate the extent of covid-19 reinfections.	1_1.8.6.2.2.	Insufficient tracking makes it challenging to estimate the extent of Covid-19 reinfections.	con	As of January 2021, Covid-19 reinfections appear to cause milder infections and therefore are unlikely to add significantly to the death rate.
as of january 2021, covid-19 reinfections appear to cause milder infections and therefore are unlikely to add significantly to the death rate.	1_1.8.6.2.2.1.	As of January 2021, Covid-19 reinfections appear to cause milder infections and therefore are unlikely to add significantly to the death rate.	pro	
inadequate testing suggests that the actual fatality rate is higher than reported and not lower. this further entails that it is deadlier than the flu .	1_1.8.6.2.3.	Inadequate testing suggests that the actual fatality rate is higher than reported and not lower. This further entails that it is deadlier than the flu .	pro	
even without accurate rates, the possible range of the fatality rate strongly indicates that covid-19 is deadlier than the seasonal flu.	1_1.8.6.3.	Even without accurate rates, the possible range of the fatality rate strongly indicates that Covid-19 is deadlier than the seasonal flu.	pro	As flu viruses undergo mutations, it is difficult to make predictions about the rate of death. In Italy, the total number of flu-related deaths during the 2014-2015 season was 65.6% higher compared to the previous season.
as flu viruses undergo mutations, it is difficult to make predictions about the rate of death. in italy, the total number of flu-related deaths during the 2014-2015 season was 65.6% higher compared to the previous season.	1_1.8.6.3.1.	As flu viruses undergo mutations, it is difficult to make predictions about the rate of death. In Italy, the total number of flu-related deaths during the 2014-2015 season was 65.6% higher compared to the previous season.	con	Mutations often lead to an increase in the number of deaths. By that trend, mutations could make Covid-19 even more dangerous than it already is.
mutations often lead to an increase in the number of deaths. by that trend, mutations could make covid-19 even more dangerous than it already is.	1_1.8.6.3.1.1.	Mutations often lead to an increase in the number of deaths. By that trend, mutations could make Covid-19 even more dangerous than it already is.	pro	
among immunocompromised patients, those with covid-19 had a higher mortality compared to those with influenza.	1_1.8.7.	Among immunocompromised patients, those with Covid-19 had a higher mortality compared to those with influenza.	pro	The formerly developed Flu Pandemic Severity Index classifies the flu's "dangerousness" (severity) in 5 categories ranging from a death rate lower than 0.1% to more than 2%. In that sense, Covid-19 is not more and not less dangerous, but fits the definition.
the formerly developed flu pandemic severity index classifies the flu's "dangerousness" (severity) in 5 categories ranging from a death rate lower than 0.1% to more than 2%. in that sense, covid-19 is not more and not less dangerous, but fits the definition.	1_1.8.7.1.	The formerly developed Flu Pandemic Severity Index classifies the flu's "dangerousness" (severity) in 5 categories ranging from a death rate lower than 0.1% to more than 2%. In that sense, Covid-19 is not more and not less dangerous, but fits the definition.	con	The Flu PSI is outdated and has been replaced by the Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework (PSAF).	The only time that the flu met the threshold for Category 5 was during the 1918 influenza pandemic. This is thus an exception rather than the rule.
the flu psi is outdated and has been replaced by the pandemic severity assessment framework (psaf).	1_1.8.7.1.1.	The Flu PSI is outdated and has been replaced by the Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework (PSAF).	pro	
the only time that the flu met the threshold for category 5 was during the 1918 influenza pandemic. this is thus an exception rather than the rule.	1_1.8.7.1.2.	The only time that the flu met the threshold for Category 5 was during the 1918 influenza pandemic. This is thus an exception rather than the rule.	pro	
covid-19 outbreaks also cause indirect deaths by using up medical resources that would have been used to treat other fatal conditions.	1_1.8.9.	Covid-19 outbreaks also cause indirect deaths by using up medical resources that would have been used to treat other fatal conditions.	pro	Covid-19 restrictions meant that many non-emergency procedures, including cancer screenings, were postponed(Across the globe, patients have reported being denied cancer care, kidney dialysis and urgent transplant surgeries, with sometimes fatal results.), leading to excess deaths indirectly related to Covid-19.
covid-19 restrictions meant that many non-emergency procedures, including cancer screenings, were postponed(across the globe, patients have reported being denied cancer care, kidney dialysis and urgent transplant surgeries, with sometimes fatal results.), leading to excess deaths indirectly related to covid-19.	1_1.8.9.1.	Covid-19 restrictions meant that many non-emergency procedures, including cancer screenings, were postponed(Across the globe, patients have reported being denied cancer care, kidney dialysis and urgent transplant surgeries, with sometimes fatal results.), leading to excess deaths indirectly related to Covid-19.	pro	Experts predict that 60,000 people will die from cancer as a result of delayed treatment or diagnosis in the UK alone.
experts predict that 60,000 people will die from cancer as a result of delayed treatment or diagnosis in the uk alone.	1_1.8.9.1.1.	Experts predict that 60,000 people will die from cancer as a result of delayed treatment or diagnosis in the UK alone.	pro	
herd immunity for covid-19 is achievable.	2_1.	Herd Immunity for COVID-19 is achievable.	pro	Herd immunity can be achieved through an extended lockdown, mask usage, and social distancing until a vaccine is made.	Herd immunity is achievable by not locking down or using masks, but by letting the disease naturally progress through the population until the majority are immune.	Without everyone's compliance with measures meant to slow the spread of the disease, herd immunity isn't fathomable and shouldn't be pursued as the end goal.	Herd immunity for COVID-19 is achievable with a vaccine.	The world is nowhere near close to having widespread resistance to COVID-19 in order to achieve herd immunity.	Recent reports of people catching COVID-19 multiple times could mean long-term immunity to the virus isn't possible.
herd immunity can be achieved through an extended lockdown, mask usage, and social distancing until a vaccine is made.	2_1.1.	Herd immunity can be achieved through an extended lockdown, mask usage, and social distancing until a vaccine is made.	pro	With lockdowns in place, not enough people are exposed to the virus, making herd immunity impossible.	Preventative measures would slow down the spread of COVID-19, so that everyone is infected at a more manageable pace.	The populations of many countries do not allow for adequate social distancing.	Masks prevent or reduce the spread of COVID-19, but do not help acheive herd immunity.
with lockdowns in place, not enough people are exposed to the virus, making herd immunity impossible.	2_1.1.1.	With lockdowns in place, not enough people are exposed to the virus, making herd immunity impossible.	con	Exposing populations to the virus would kill millions of people well before herd immunity could be reached.	Many countries have started easing or lifting lockdowns. This makes it possible for large groups of the population to be exposed to the virus.
exposing populations to the virus would kill millions of people well before herd immunity could be reached.	2_1.1.1.1.	Exposing populations to the virus would kill millions of people well before herd immunity could be reached.	con	It is predicted that over half of Americans would die from COVID-19 before herd immunity could be reached in 2021.
it is predicted that over half of americans would die from covid-19 before herd immunity could be reached in 2021.	2_1.1.1.1.1.	It is predicted that over half of Americans would die from COVID-19 before herd immunity could be reached in 2021.	con	
many countries have started easing or lifting lockdowns. this makes it possible for large groups of the population to be exposed to the virus.	2_1.1.1.2.	Many countries have started easing or lifting lockdowns. This makes it possible for large groups of the population to be exposed to the virus.	pro	A surge in cases within Germany has resulted in the reimposition of local lockdowns in the country.
a surge in cases within germany has resulted in the reimposition of local lockdowns in the country.	2_1.1.1.2.1.	A surge in cases within Germany has resulted in the reimposition of local lockdowns in the country.	con	
preventative measures would slow down the spread of covid-19, so that everyone is infected at a more manageable pace.	2_1.1.2.	Preventative measures would slow down the spread of COVID-19, so that everyone is infected at a more manageable pace.	pro	The time period during which COVID-19 was spreading unchecked, hospitals in countries throughout the world were overwhelmed by COVID-19 patients, which resulted in reduced quality of care for all patients.	Limited medical resources such as medical supplies, healthcare infrastructure etc would be more readily available if there were fewer patients to care for.	Allowing everyone to get infected will still result in a significant number of deaths, which is an immoral act that governments should not sanction.
the time period during which covid-19 was spreading unchecked, hospitals in countries throughout the world were overwhelmed by covid-19 patients, which resulted in reduced quality of care for all patients.	2_1.1.2.1.	The time period during which COVID-19 was spreading unchecked, hospitals in countries throughout the world were overwhelmed by COVID-19 patients, which resulted in reduced quality of care for all patients.	pro	Patients suffering from diseases apart from COVID-19 were unable to access medical assistance due to hospitals being overwhelmed. This has resulted in many avoidable deaths.
patients suffering from diseases apart from covid-19 were unable to access medical assistance due to hospitals being overwhelmed. this has resulted in many avoidable deaths.	2_1.1.2.1.1.	Patients suffering from diseases apart from COVID-19 were unable to access medical assistance due to hospitals being overwhelmed. This has resulted in many avoidable deaths.	pro	
limited medical resources such as medical supplies, healthcare infrastructure etc would be more readily available if there were fewer patients to care for.	2_1.1.2.2.	Limited medical resources such as medical supplies, healthcare infrastructure etc would be more readily available if there were fewer patients to care for.	pro	
allowing everyone to get infected will still result in a significant number of deaths, which is an immoral act that governments should not sanction.	2_1.1.2.3.	Allowing everyone to get infected will still result in a significant number of deaths, which is an immoral act that governments should not sanction.	con	Individuals who contract COVID-19 may die as a result of the infection.
individuals who contract covid-19 may die as a result of the infection.	2_1.1.2.3.1.	Individuals who contract COVID-19 may die as a result of the infection.	con	
the populations of many countries do not allow for adequate social distancing.	2_1.1.3.	The populations of many countries do not allow for adequate social distancing.	con	India, which has the third-highest COVID-19 cases as of August 2020, is a country with more than 1.3 billion people and has a population density of 464 people per sq km. In comparison, China, the world's most populous country, has a population density of 153 people per sq km.
india, which has the third-highest covid-19 cases as of august 2020, is a country with more than 1.3 billion people and has a population density of 464 people per sq km. in comparison, china, the world's most populous country, has a population density of 153 people per sq km.	2_1.1.3.1.	India, which has the third-highest COVID-19 cases as of August 2020, is a country with more than 1.3 billion people and has a population density of 464 people per sq km. In comparison, China, the world's most populous country, has a population density of 153 people per sq km.	con	
masks prevent or reduce the spread of covid-19, but do not help acheive herd immunity.	2_1.1.4.	Masks prevent or reduce the spread of COVID-19, but do not help acheive herd immunity.	con	Herd immunity is a product of the non-vulnerable population getting the virus, recovering, and then being unable to spread the virus.	Achieving herd immunity by circumventing preventative measures like masks, increases the likelihood that the non-vulnerable population carries the virus to the vulnerable population.
herd immunity is a product of the non-vulnerable population getting the virus, recovering, and then being unable to spread the virus.	2_1.1.4.1.	Herd immunity is a product of the non-vulnerable population getting the virus, recovering, and then being unable to spread the virus.	con	
achieving herd immunity by circumventing preventative measures like masks, increases the likelihood that the non-vulnerable population carries the virus to the vulnerable population.	2_1.1.4.2.	Achieving herd immunity by circumventing preventative measures like masks, increases the likelihood that the non-vulnerable population carries the virus to the vulnerable population.	pro	
herd immunity is achievable by not locking down or using masks, but by letting the disease naturally progress through the population until the majority are immune.	2_1.2.	Herd immunity is achievable by not locking down or using masks, but by letting the disease naturally progress through the population until the majority are immune.	pro	Immunologists warn that exposing oneself to COVID-19 to achieve immunity is irresponsible.	In order to build up an immunity to a virus, one must expose themself to the virus.	This may work, but risks the lives of an incredible number of individuals in the process.
immunologists warn that exposing oneself to covid-19 to achieve immunity is irresponsible.	2_1.2.1.	Immunologists warn that exposing oneself to COVID-19 to achieve immunity is irresponsible.	con	Individuals who contract COVID-19 may die as a result of the infection.	Those with COVID-19 may transmit the virus to others around them.	Individuals should be able to make their own decisions without interference from the government.
those with covid-19 may transmit the virus to others around them.	2_1.2.1.2.	Those with COVID-19 may transmit the virus to others around them.	con	
individuals should be able to make their own decisions without interference from the government.	2_1.2.1.3.	Individuals should be able to make their own decisions without interference from the government.	pro	
in order to build up an immunity to a virus, one must expose themself to the virus.	2_1.2.2.	In order to build up an immunity to a virus, one must expose themself to the virus.	pro	Greater protection against COVID-19 is offered via vaccines compared to through natural infection.	When one is exposed to COVID-19, the body creates antibodies(Some antibodies made for the virus that causes COVID-19 provide protection from getting infected.) that offer protection to the person from future infections.
greater protection against covid-19 is offered via vaccines compared to through natural infection.	2_1.2.2.1.	Greater protection against COVID-19 is offered via vaccines compared to through natural infection.	con	
when one is exposed to covid-19, the body creates antibodies(some antibodies made for the virus that causes covid-19 provide protection from getting infected.) that offer protection to the person from future infections.	2_1.2.2.2.	When one is exposed to COVID-19, the body creates antibodies(Some antibodies made for the virus that causes COVID-19 provide protection from getting infected.) that offer protection to the person from future infections.	pro	
this may work, but risks the lives of an incredible number of individuals in the process.	2_1.2.3.	This may work, but risks the lives of an incredible number of individuals in the process.	con	The UK's attempt to deal with the COVID-19 outbreak by aiming for herd immunity was a failure.	The number of lives that would be lost is fewer than the benefits incurred by ending the pandemic.	Most countries cannot handle the rate of infections, and subsequently, deaths that would happen as a result of natural progression.	The rate of infection and death in the San Quentin State Prison shows that the cost of achieving herd immunity through mass exposure is not worth the risk.
the uk's attempt to deal with the covid-19 outbreak by aiming for herd immunity was a failure.	2_1.2.3.1.	The UK's attempt to deal with the COVID-19 outbreak by aiming for herd immunity was a failure.	con	
the number of lives that would be lost is fewer than the benefits incurred by ending the pandemic.	2_1.2.3.2.	The number of lives that would be lost is fewer than the benefits incurred by ending the pandemic.	pro	According to a study conducted in 2021, COVID-19 has an infection mortality rate of 0.00% to 1.63% (p. 19).	Ending the COVID-19 pandemic is estimated to be worth 5-15% of wealth.	Such a cost-benefit analysis undermines the sanctity of human life.
according to a study conducted in 2021, covid-19 has an infection mortality rate of 0.00% to 1.63% (p. 19).	2_1.2.3.2.1.	According to a study conducted in 2021, COVID-19 has an infection mortality rate of 0.00% to 1.63% (p. 19).	pro	
ending the covid-19 pandemic is estimated to be worth 5-15% of wealth.	2_1.2.3.2.2.	Ending the COVID-19 pandemic is estimated to be worth 5-15% of wealth.	pro	
such a cost-benefit analysis undermines the sanctity of human life.	2_1.2.3.2.3.	Such a cost-benefit analysis undermines the sanctity of human life.	con	
most countries cannot handle the rate of infections, and subsequently, deaths that would happen as a result of natural progression.	2_1.2.3.3.	Most countries cannot handle the rate of infections, and subsequently, deaths that would happen as a result of natural progression.	con	
the rate of infection and death in the san quentin state prison shows that the cost of achieving herd immunity through mass exposure is not worth the risk.	2_1.2.3.4.	The rate of infection and death in the San Quentin State Prison shows that the cost of achieving herd immunity through mass exposure is not worth the risk.	con	
without everyone's compliance with measures meant to slow the spread of the disease, herd immunity isn't fathomable and shouldn't be pursued as the end goal.	2_1.3.	Without everyone's compliance with measures meant to slow the spread of the disease, herd immunity isn't fathomable and shouldn't be pursued as the end goal.	con	Governments can coerce compliance if it means saving more lives.	Not pursuing herd immunity is akin to not pursuing a cure for cancer; the cost of not doing so is a greater risk than the attempt.	With lockdowns in place, not enough people are exposed to the virus, making herd immunity impossible.	Many people are against the institution of safety measures to slow the spread of COVID-19.
governments can coerce compliance if it means saving more lives.	2_1.3.1.	Governments can coerce compliance if it means saving more lives.	pro	Police forces do not have the manpower to enforce actions necessary to produce herd immunity.
police forces do not have the manpower to enforce actions necessary to produce herd immunity.	2_1.3.1.1.	Police forces do not have the manpower to enforce actions necessary to produce herd immunity.	con	
not pursuing herd immunity is akin to not pursuing a cure for cancer; the cost of not doing so is a greater risk than the attempt.	2_1.3.2.	Not pursuing herd immunity is akin to not pursuing a cure for cancer; the cost of not doing so is a greater risk than the attempt.	pro	
many people are against the institution of safety measures to slow the spread of covid-19.	2_1.3.4.	Many people are against the institution of safety measures to slow the spread of COVID-19.	con	In July 2020, the United Kingdom, hundreds of demonstrators gathered to protest against mask-wearing.	Safety measures can be enforced to ensure people are properly safeguarding against Covid-19.	In the United States, wearing masks have incited a nationwide quarrel about public health, civil liberties and personal freedoms.
in july 2020, the united kingdom, hundreds of demonstrators gathered to protest against mask-wearing.	2_1.3.4.1.	In July 2020, the United Kingdom, hundreds of demonstrators gathered to protest against mask-wearing.	con	Protestors in London have been seen to link the use of masks with baseless conspiracy theories.
protestors in london have been seen to link the use of masks with baseless conspiracy theories.	2_1.3.4.1.1.	Protestors in London have been seen to link the use of masks with baseless conspiracy theories.	con	Many people who are against the use of masks believe that COVID-19 was fueled by the 5G wireless network technology.
many people who are against the use of masks believe that covid-19 was fueled by the 5g wireless network technology.	2_1.3.4.1.1.1.	Many people who are against the use of masks believe that COVID-19 was fueled by the 5G wireless network technology.	con	
safety measures can be enforced to ensure people are properly safeguarding against covid-19.	2_1.3.4.2.	Safety measures can be enforced to ensure people are properly safeguarding against Covid-19.	pro	Enforcing measures such as mask-wearing can be dangerous for people without proper enforcement training to take on.
enforcing measures such as mask-wearing can be dangerous for people without proper enforcement training to take on.	2_1.3.4.2.1.	Enforcing measures such as mask-wearing can be dangerous for people without proper enforcement training to take on.	con	
in the united states, wearing masks have incited a nationwide quarrel about public health, civil liberties and personal freedoms.	2_1.3.4.3.	In the United States, wearing masks have incited a nationwide quarrel about public health, civil liberties and personal freedoms.	con	This reflects a classic American struggle between those who defend public safety and those who believe just as deeply in personal liberty.
this reflects a classic american struggle between those who defend public safety and those who believe just as deeply in personal liberty.	2_1.3.4.3.1.	This reflects a classic American struggle between those who defend public safety and those who believe just as deeply in personal liberty.	con	Many Democrats in the United States support the wearing of masks, according to a poll conducted by the Pew Research Center.	This divide is weakening as more Republicans are wearing masks.
many democrats in the united states support the wearing of masks, according to a poll conducted by the pew research center.	2_1.3.4.3.1.1.	Many Democrats in the United States support the wearing of masks, according to a poll conducted by the Pew Research Center.	con	As of June 2020, 63% of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents say that masks should always be worn, compared to 29% of Republicans and Republican leaners.
as of june 2020, 63% of democrats and democratic-leaning independents say that masks should always be worn, compared to 29% of republicans and republican leaners.	2_1.3.4.3.1.1.1.	As of June 2020, 63% of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents say that masks should always be worn, compared to 29% of Republicans and Republican leaners.	con	
this divide is weakening as more republicans are wearing masks.	2_1.3.4.3.1.2.	This divide is weakening as more Republicans are wearing masks.	pro	
herd immunity for covid-19 is achievable with a vaccine.	2_1.4.	Herd immunity for COVID-19 is achievable with a vaccine.	pro	A number of vaccines for COVID-19 have successfully been developed and approved for use.	There is widespread global anti-vaccination sentiment, which makes herd immunity through a vaccine unlikely.	Vaccines have successfully controlled the infection rates of many fatally contagious diseases and viruses through herd immunity. It is possible for COVID-19 as well.	Vaccinations have inherent limitations due to which herd immunity for COVID-19 is unlikely to be achieved.
a number of vaccines for covid-19 have successfully been developed and approved for use.	2_1.4.1.	A number of vaccines for COVID-19 have successfully been developed and approved for use.	pro	As of August 2021, Pfizer has received full FDA-approval.	Inoculations began in January 2021.	Russia has already developed a COVID-19 vaccine, named Sputnik-V, that has been given regulatory approval.
as of august 2021, pfizer has received full fda-approval.	2_1.4.1.1.	As of August 2021, Pfizer has received full FDA-approval.	pro	
inoculations began in january 2021.	2_1.4.1.2.	Inoculations began in January 2021.	pro	
russia has already developed a covid-19 vaccine, named sputnik-v, that has been given regulatory approval.	2_1.4.1.3.	Russia has already developed a COVID-19 vaccine, named Sputnik-V, that has been given regulatory approval.	pro	Many experts have raised concerns about the speed of Russia's work, suggesting that researchers might be cutting corners and thus the vaccine might not be safe for use.
many experts have raised concerns about the speed of russia's work, suggesting that researchers might be cutting corners and thus the vaccine might not be safe for use.	2_1.4.1.3.1.	Many experts have raised concerns about the speed of Russia's work, suggesting that researchers might be cutting corners and thus the vaccine might not be safe for use.	con	Currently, the Russian vaccine is not among the WHO's list of six vaccines that have reached phase-three clinical trials, indicating that it has not been widely tested enough to near recommendation.	Since the Gamaleya Institute in Moscow, the institute that developed the vaccine, has not released any safety or immunity data, scientists have been unable to make an assessment and are thus skeptical of the vaccine.
currently, the russian vaccine is not among the who's list of six vaccines that have reached phase-three clinical trials, indicating that it has not been widely tested enough to near recommendation.	2_1.4.1.3.1.1.	Currently, the Russian vaccine is not among the WHO's list of six vaccines that have reached phase-three clinical trials, indicating that it has not been widely tested enough to near recommendation.	con	The combined first- and second-phase trials of the vaccine were conducted on only 76 people.
the combined first- and second-phase trials of the vaccine were conducted on only 76 people.	2_1.4.1.3.1.1.1.	The combined first- and second-phase trials of the vaccine were conducted on only 76 people.	con	
since the gamaleya institute in moscow, the institute that developed the vaccine, has not released any safety or immunity data, scientists have been unable to make an assessment and are thus skeptical of the vaccine.	2_1.4.1.3.1.2.	Since the Gamaleya Institute in Moscow, the institute that developed the vaccine, has not released any safety or immunity data, scientists have been unable to make an assessment and are thus skeptical of the vaccine.	con	
there is widespread global anti-vaccination sentiment, which makes herd immunity through a vaccine unlikely.	2_1.4.2.	There is widespread global anti-vaccination sentiment, which makes herd immunity through a vaccine unlikely.	con	About 34% of Americans are against getting the vaccine. Without the compliance of at least 70%(Experts estimate that in the U.S., 70% of the population — more than 200 million people — would have to recover from COVID-19 to halt the pandemic.) of the population, herd immunity is not achievable.	This vast non-acceptance is traceable to media rhetoric about a Trump-administration vaccine. Measures can be taken to counter such negative influences.	Anti-vaccination sentiment has been on the rise in online forums since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.
about 34% of americans are against getting the vaccine. without the compliance of at least 70%(experts estimate that in the u.s., 70% of the population — more than 200 million people — would have to recover from covid-19 to halt the pandemic.) of the population, herd immunity is not achievable.	2_1.4.2.1.	About 34% of Americans are against getting the vaccine. Without the compliance of at least 70%(Experts estimate that in the U.S., 70% of the population — more than 200 million people — would have to recover from COVID-19 to halt the pandemic.) of the population, herd immunity is not achievable.	con	A Gallup poll found that the 70% goal needed to achieve herd immunity could still be achieved even when vaccine-hesitancy in the US was accounted for.
a gallup poll found that the 70% goal needed to achieve herd immunity could still be achieved even when vaccine-hesitancy in the us was accounted for.	2_1.4.2.1.1.	A Gallup poll found that the 70% goal needed to achieve herd immunity could still be achieved even when vaccine-hesitancy in the US was accounted for.	pro	
this vast non-acceptance is traceable to media rhetoric about a trump-administration vaccine. measures can be taken to counter such negative influences.	2_1.4.2.2.	This vast non-acceptance is traceable to media rhetoric about a Trump-administration vaccine. Measures can be taken to counter such negative influences.	pro	Anti-vaccination sentiment has been a problem in the US for decades. Efforts to counter this are likely to take a long while before they are fruitful, making herd immunity out of reach.	Improving communication strategies(Based on our data, we also propose solutions to improve the communication strategy of health organizations and build a community of engaged influencers that support the dissemination of scientific insights, including issues related to vaccines and their safety.) of health organizations so that they are able to disseminate factual information to the general public could counter misinformation and the negative reputation that vaccines have acquired.	The number of independent reviews of the vaccine can be improved to assure people that the vaccine is not a plot hatched by the "scientific and political elite(Plandemic,” featuring a discredited American scientist with ties to the anti-vaccine movement.\n\nThe video cast the coronavirus crisis as a shadowy plot orchestrated by the “scientific and political elite.”)".	Positive media coverage of the vaccine can be promoted so that vaccine acceptance can be promoted.	There is a lack of trust between individuals and institutions, which can undermine any official attempts to counter negative influences.
anti-vaccination sentiment has been a problem in the us for decades. efforts to counter this are likely to take a long while before they are fruitful, making herd immunity out of reach.	2_1.4.2.2.1.	Anti-vaccination sentiment has been a problem in the US for decades. Efforts to counter this are likely to take a long while before they are fruitful, making herd immunity out of reach.	con	
improving communication strategies(based on our data, we also propose solutions to improve the communication strategy of health organizations and build a community of engaged influencers that support the dissemination of scientific insights, including issues related to vaccines and their safety.) of health organizations so that they are able to disseminate factual information to the general public could counter misinformation and the negative reputation that vaccines have acquired.	2_1.4.2.2.2.	Improving communication strategies(Based on our data, we also propose solutions to improve the communication strategy of health organizations and build a community of engaged influencers that support the dissemination of scientific insights, including issues related to vaccines and their safety.) of health organizations so that they are able to disseminate factual information to the general public could counter misinformation and the negative reputation that vaccines have acquired.	pro	
the number of independent reviews of the vaccine can be improved to assure people that the vaccine is not a plot hatched by the "scientific and political elite(plandemic,” featuring a discredited american scientist with ties to the anti-vaccine movement.\n\nthe video cast the coronavirus crisis as a shadowy plot orchestrated by the “scientific and political elite.”)".	2_1.4.2.2.3.	The number of independent reviews of the vaccine can be improved to assure people that the vaccine is not a plot hatched by the "scientific and political elite(Plandemic,” featuring a discredited American scientist with ties to the anti-vaccine movement.\n\nThe video cast the coronavirus crisis as a shadowy plot orchestrated by the “scientific and political elite.”)".	pro	
positive media coverage of the vaccine can be promoted so that vaccine acceptance can be promoted.	2_1.4.2.2.4.	Positive media coverage of the vaccine can be promoted so that vaccine acceptance can be promoted.	pro	
there is a lack of trust between individuals and institutions, which can undermine any official attempts to counter negative influences.	2_1.4.2.2.5.	There is a lack of trust between individuals and institutions, which can undermine any official attempts to counter negative influences.	con	
anti-vaccination sentiment has been on the rise in online forums since the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic.	2_1.4.2.3.	Anti-vaccination sentiment has been on the rise in online forums since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.	con	Online platforms have been introducing measures against posting misinformation regarding vaccines. These measures can and should be strengthened.	Political polarization exacerbated anti-vaccination sentiment in the US.
online platforms have been introducing measures against posting misinformation regarding vaccines. these measures can and should be strengthened.	2_1.4.2.3.1.	Online platforms have been introducing measures against posting misinformation regarding vaccines. These measures can and should be strengthened.	pro	Facebook has launched a campaign to combat misinformation concerning COVID-19.	Instagram has taken numerous measures to combat COVID-19 misinformation.	These platforms have had more than a year to institute these platforms, and yet, even by June 2021, all their measures have fell short of what was needed. It is unlikely that they will strengthen their position on misinformation now that the worst of the pandemic is behind us.
facebook has launched a campaign to combat misinformation concerning covid-19.	2_1.4.2.3.1.1.	Facebook has launched a campaign to combat misinformation concerning COVID-19.	pro	
instagram has taken numerous measures to combat covid-19 misinformation.	2_1.4.2.3.1.2.	Instagram has taken numerous measures to combat COVID-19 misinformation.	pro	
these platforms have had more than a year to institute these platforms, and yet, even by june 2021, all their measures have fell short of what was needed. it is unlikely that they will strengthen their position on misinformation now that the worst of the pandemic is behind us.	2_1.4.2.3.1.3.	These platforms have had more than a year to institute these platforms, and yet, even by June 2021, all their measures have fell short of what was needed. It is unlikely that they will strengthen their position on misinformation now that the worst of the pandemic is behind us.	con	Despite adopting a more aggressive approach to tackling COVID-19 misinformation in March 2021, Facebook's algorithm continues to lead people down an echo-chamber of misinformation.	Misinformation in languages other than English remains rampant on social media platforms.	There is no way to ascertain that the worst of the pandemic is over, given how often scientists and experts have incorrectly predicted this in the past.
despite adopting a more aggressive approach to tackling covid-19 misinformation in march 2021, facebook's algorithm continues to lead people down an echo-chamber of misinformation.	2_1.4.2.3.1.3.1.	Despite adopting a more aggressive approach to tackling COVID-19 misinformation in March 2021, Facebook's algorithm continues to lead people down an echo-chamber of misinformation.	con	
misinformation in languages other than english remains rampant on social media platforms.	2_1.4.2.3.1.3.2.	Misinformation in languages other than English remains rampant on social media platforms.	con	
there is no way to ascertain that the worst of the pandemic is over, given how often scientists and experts have incorrectly predicted this in the past.	2_1.4.2.3.1.3.3.	There is no way to ascertain that the worst of the pandemic is over, given how often scientists and experts have incorrectly predicted this in the past.	pro	After nearly 2 years of the pandemic, people have acclimated to COVID-19. They are thus not as likely to put pressure on social media platforms to change their ways.
after nearly 2 years of the pandemic, people have acclimated to covid-19. they are thus not as likely to put pressure on social media platforms to change their ways.	2_1.4.2.3.1.3.3.1.	After nearly 2 years of the pandemic, people have acclimated to COVID-19. They are thus not as likely to put pressure on social media platforms to change their ways.	con	
political polarization exacerbated anti-vaccination sentiment in the us.	2_1.4.2.3.2.	Political polarization exacerbated anti-vaccination sentiment in the US.	con	
vaccines have successfully controlled the infection rates of many fatally contagious diseases and viruses through herd immunity. it is possible for covid-19 as well.	2_1.4.3.	Vaccines have successfully controlled the infection rates of many fatally contagious diseases and viruses through herd immunity. It is possible for COVID-19 as well.	pro	Smallpox was eradicated("It was eradicated solely through vaccination. We do not really have any treatments even today for smallpox that are proven, tried and tested," Glatt said.) through herd immunity, which was brought on by the creation of a vaccine against the disease.
smallpox was eradicated("it was eradicated solely through vaccination. we do not really have any treatments even today for smallpox that are proven, tried and tested," glatt said.) through herd immunity, which was brought on by the creation of a vaccine against the disease.	2_1.4.3.1.	Smallpox was eradicated("It was eradicated solely through vaccination. We do not really have any treatments even today for smallpox that are proven, tried and tested," Glatt said.) through herd immunity, which was brought on by the creation of a vaccine against the disease.	pro	
vaccinations have inherent limitations due to which herd immunity for covid-19 is unlikely to be achieved.	2_1.4.4.	Vaccinations have inherent limitations due to which herd immunity for COVID-19 is unlikely to be achieved.	con	Mutations in SARS-CoV-2 make vaccines less effective.	Vaccinations are not guaranteed protection against contracting COVID-19.	Vaccines can make tackling the COVID-19 pandemic more manageable.	Protection from some vaccines can diminish over time, requiring re-vaccination, which many people might be unable or unwilling to obtain.
mutations in sars-cov-2 make vaccines less effective.	2_1.4.4.1.	Mutations in SARS-CoV-2 make vaccines less effective.	con	Against the Delta variant, the effectiveness of the Pfizer vaccine fell from 93.7% to 88%(With the BNT162b2 vaccine, the effectiveness of two doses was 93.7% (95% CI, 91.6 to 95.3) among persons with the alpha variant and 88.0% (95% CI, 85.3 to 90.1) among those with the delta variant.).	While vaccine effectiveness may be decreased by mutations, the effectiveness is still high enough to offer significant protection, particularly if the majority of people decide to get vaccinated.	According to some experts, a vaccine resistant strain of COVID-19 may evolve.
against the delta variant, the effectiveness of the pfizer vaccine fell from 93.7% to 88%(with the bnt162b2 vaccine, the effectiveness of two doses was 93.7% (95% ci, 91.6 to 95.3) among persons with the alpha variant and 88.0% (95% ci, 85.3 to 90.1) among those with the delta variant.).	2_1.4.4.1.1.	Against the Delta variant, the effectiveness of the Pfizer vaccine fell from 93.7% to 88%(With the BNT162b2 vaccine, the effectiveness of two doses was 93.7% (95% CI, 91.6 to 95.3) among persons with the alpha variant and 88.0% (95% CI, 85.3 to 90.1) among those with the delta variant.).	con	
while vaccine effectiveness may be decreased by mutations, the effectiveness is still high enough to offer significant protection, particularly if the majority of people decide to get vaccinated.	2_1.4.4.1.2.	While vaccine effectiveness may be decreased by mutations, the effectiveness is still high enough to offer significant protection, particularly if the majority of people decide to get vaccinated.	pro	The Moderna vaccine is 96% effective against COVID-19 hospitalizations. Of the sample of people tested, 47% had been infected by the Delta variant.
the moderna vaccine is 96% effective against covid-19 hospitalizations. of the sample of people tested, 47% had been infected by the delta variant.	2_1.4.4.1.2.1.	The Moderna vaccine is 96% effective against COVID-19 hospitalizations. Of the sample of people tested, 47% had been infected by the Delta variant.	pro	
according to some experts, a vaccine resistant strain of covid-19 may evolve.	2_1.4.4.1.3.	According to some experts, a vaccine resistant strain of COVID-19 may evolve.	con	This likelihood can be minimized(The overwhelming majority - 88 per cent - said that persistent low vaccine coverage in many countries would make it more likely for vaccine resistant mutations to appear.) by ensuring greater vaccine coverage in countries throughout the world.
this likelihood can be minimized(the overwhelming majority - 88 per cent - said that persistent low vaccine coverage in many countries would make it more likely for vaccine resistant mutations to appear.) by ensuring greater vaccine coverage in countries throughout the world.	2_1.4.4.1.3.1.	This likelihood can be minimized(The overwhelming majority - 88 per cent - said that persistent low vaccine coverage in many countries would make it more likely for vaccine resistant mutations to appear.) by ensuring greater vaccine coverage in countries throughout the world.	pro	
vaccinations are not guaranteed protection against contracting covid-19.	2_1.4.4.2.	Vaccinations are not guaranteed protection against contracting COVID-19.	con	Breakthrough infections have been observed in those who have been vaccinated against COVID-19.	Vaccines are not 100% effective - Pfizer, one of the best vaccines currently available against COVID-19, has 91.3%(In April, the company announced the vaccine had 91.3% efficacy against COVID-19, based on measuring how well it prevented symptomatic COVID-19 infection seven days through up to six months after the second dose.) efficacy.	Vaccines still provide a significant degree of protection, which is further improved if everyone opts to get vaccinated.
breakthrough infections have been observed in those who have been vaccinated against covid-19.	2_1.4.4.2.1.	Breakthrough infections have been observed in those who have been vaccinated against COVID-19.	con	Breakthrough infections make up a small minority of cases.
breakthrough infections make up a small minority of cases.	2_1.4.4.2.1.1.	Breakthrough infections make up a small minority of cases.	pro	
vaccines are not 100% effective - pfizer, one of the best vaccines currently available against covid-19, has 91.3%(in april, the company announced the vaccine had 91.3% efficacy against covid-19, based on measuring how well it prevented symptomatic covid-19 infection seven days through up to six months after the second dose.) efficacy.	2_1.4.4.2.2.	Vaccines are not 100% effective - Pfizer, one of the best vaccines currently available against COVID-19, has 91.3%(In April, the company announced the vaccine had 91.3% efficacy against COVID-19, based on measuring how well it prevented symptomatic COVID-19 infection seven days through up to six months after the second dose.) efficacy.	con	
vaccines still provide a significant degree of protection, which is further improved if everyone opts to get vaccinated.	2_1.4.4.2.3.	Vaccines still provide a significant degree of protection, which is further improved if everyone opts to get vaccinated.	pro	The effectiveness of the measles vaccine is dependent on 90% of the population being vaccinated. If we successfully contained the spread of measles at different points in history, SARS-CoV-2, which is less transmissible than the measles virus, can also be contained.
the effectiveness of the measles vaccine is dependent on 90% of the population being vaccinated. if we successfully contained the spread of measles at different points in history, sars-cov-2, which is less transmissible than the measles virus, can also be contained.	2_1.4.4.2.3.1.	The effectiveness of the measles vaccine is dependent on 90% of the population being vaccinated. If we successfully contained the spread of measles at different points in history, SARS-CoV-2, which is less transmissible than the measles virus, can also be contained.	pro	
vaccines can make tackling the covid-19 pandemic more manageable.	2_1.4.4.3.	Vaccines can make tackling the COVID-19 pandemic more manageable.	pro	Those who are vaccinated tend to have milder symptoms(“Vaccination is more effective at preventing hospitalisation and death as compared to preventing infection, especially against the highly infectious Delta variant,” says Dr Abdul Bari Khan, CEO Indus Hospital Karachi.), and are less likely to be hospitalized. This reduces pressure on healthcare resources.	The rollout of vaccines can indicate to the public that the government is successfully managing the crisis, which can help repair public trust.	The financial (p. 12), medical, and political resources required to roll out vaccines will pose a strain.
those who are vaccinated tend to have milder symptoms(“vaccination is more effective at preventing hospitalisation and death as compared to preventing infection, especially against the highly infectious delta variant,” says dr abdul bari khan, ceo indus hospital karachi.), and are less likely to be hospitalized. this reduces pressure on healthcare resources.	2_1.4.4.3.1.	Those who are vaccinated tend to have milder symptoms(“Vaccination is more effective at preventing hospitalisation and death as compared to preventing infection, especially against the highly infectious Delta variant,” says Dr Abdul Bari Khan, CEO Indus Hospital Karachi.), and are less likely to be hospitalized. This reduces pressure on healthcare resources.	pro	The time period during which COVID-19 was spreading unchecked, hospitals in countries throughout the world were overwhelmed by COVID-19 patients, which resulted in reduced quality of care for all patients.
the rollout of vaccines can indicate to the public that the government is successfully managing the crisis, which can help repair public trust.	2_1.4.4.3.2.	The rollout of vaccines can indicate to the public that the government is successfully managing the crisis, which can help repair public trust.	pro	Public trust in governments of many countries has been damaged severely by the dismal way in which governments have handled the COVID-19 crisis.	The lack of trust in the government is undermining vaccine rollout efforts. Other measures need to be taken to repair public trust.
public trust in governments of many countries has been damaged severely by the dismal way in which governments have handled the covid-19 crisis.	2_1.4.4.3.2.1.	Public trust in governments of many countries has been damaged severely by the dismal way in which governments have handled the COVID-19 crisis.	pro	Lack of public trust is a persistent problem predating the COVID-19 pandemic.
lack of public trust is a persistent problem predating the covid-19 pandemic.	2_1.4.4.3.2.1.1.	Lack of public trust is a persistent problem predating the COVID-19 pandemic.	con	
the lack of trust in the government is undermining vaccine rollout efforts. other measures need to be taken to repair public trust.	2_1.4.4.3.2.2.	The lack of trust in the government is undermining vaccine rollout efforts. Other measures need to be taken to repair public trust.	con	Targeted action and communication strategies that utilize trusted sources of information could help repair public trust.
targeted action and communication strategies that utilize trusted sources of information could help repair public trust.	2_1.4.4.3.2.2.1.	Targeted action and communication strategies that utilize trusted sources of information could help repair public trust.	con	
the financial (p. 12), medical, and political resources required to roll out vaccines will pose a strain.	2_1.4.4.3.3.	The financial (p. 12), medical, and political resources required to roll out vaccines will pose a strain.	con	Until the pandemic is contained, these resources will continue to be strained. The longer it lasts, the more unsustainable things become.
until the pandemic is contained, these resources will continue to be strained. the longer it lasts, the more unsustainable things become.	2_1.4.4.3.3.1.	Until the pandemic is contained, these resources will continue to be strained. The longer it lasts, the more unsustainable things become.	pro	
protection from some vaccines can diminish over time, requiring re-vaccination, which many people might be unable or unwilling to obtain.	2_1.4.4.4.	Protection from some vaccines can diminish over time, requiring re-vaccination, which many people might be unable or unwilling to obtain.	con	Booster doses can be administered using the same infrastructure and processes as the ones used when administering the original jabs to ensure that people remain protected from COVID-19.	Some people may object to vaccines because of religious reasons. Therefore, even if they get vaccinated once, they might be unwilling to revaccinate.	Some people reject vaccines due to conspiracy theories.
booster doses can be administered using the same infrastructure and processes as the ones used when administering the original jabs to ensure that people remain protected from covid-19.	2_1.4.4.4.1.	Booster doses can be administered using the same infrastructure and processes as the ones used when administering the original jabs to ensure that people remain protected from COVID-19.	pro	Much of the infrastructure used to administer the original round of vaccinations can only be used temporarily, such as stadiums and places of worship.
much of the infrastructure used to administer the original round of vaccinations can only be used temporarily, such as stadiums and places of worship.	2_1.4.4.4.1.1.	Much of the infrastructure used to administer the original round of vaccinations can only be used temporarily, such as stadiums and places of worship.	con	
some people may object to vaccines because of religious reasons. therefore, even if they get vaccinated once, they might be unwilling to revaccinate.	2_1.4.4.4.2.	Some people may object to vaccines because of religious reasons. Therefore, even if they get vaccinated once, they might be unwilling to revaccinate.	con	If someone has consented to getting vaccinated once despite religious inhibitions, there is no reason to believe that they will not be willing to get vaccinated a second time.
if someone has consented to getting vaccinated once despite religious inhibitions, there is no reason to believe that they will not be willing to get vaccinated a second time.	2_1.4.4.4.2.1.	If someone has consented to getting vaccinated once despite religious inhibitions, there is no reason to believe that they will not be willing to get vaccinated a second time.	pro	
some people reject vaccines due to conspiracy theories.	2_1.4.4.4.3.	Some people reject vaccines due to conspiracy theories.	con	
the world is nowhere near close to having widespread resistance to covid-19 in order to achieve herd immunity.	2_1.5.	The world is nowhere near close to having widespread resistance to COVID-19 in order to achieve herd immunity.	con	There is no need to achieve widespread resistance immediately. The world has adapted to the virus and its effects, so that even long-term solutions are viable.	Daily infection rates around the world continue to spike.	Experts estimate that 60-90% of a country's population must have immunity to a disease for it to stop spreading. In most countries, these percentages are still too low.
there is no need to achieve widespread resistance immediately. the world has adapted to the virus and its effects, so that even long-term solutions are viable.	2_1.5.1.	There is no need to achieve widespread resistance immediately. The world has adapted to the virus and its effects, so that even long-term solutions are viable.	pro	Workplaces have adapted by introducing the option to work remotely.	Treatments and therapies for COVID-19 infections are available, with further being developed.
workplaces have adapted by introducing the option to work remotely.	2_1.5.1.1.	Workplaces have adapted by introducing the option to work remotely.	pro	
treatments and therapies for covid-19 infections are available, with further being developed.	2_1.5.1.2.	Treatments and therapies for COVID-19 infections are available, with further being developed.	pro	
daily infection rates around the world continue to spike.	2_1.5.2.	Daily infection rates around the world continue to spike.	con	As of August 2020, the most affected countries in the world are seeing a decline in infection rates.	As SARS-CoV-2 mutates, infection rates increase as variants are more transmissible and can better evade our immune defenses.	In the United States, the percentage of new COVID-19 infection cases have continued to decrease nationally since mid-July.
as of august 2020, the most affected countries in the world are seeing a decline in infection rates.	2_1.5.2.1.	As of August 2020, the most affected countries in the world are seeing a decline in infection rates.	pro	
as sars-cov-2 mutates, infection rates increase as variants are more transmissible and can better evade our immune defenses.	2_1.5.2.2.	As SARS-CoV-2 mutates, infection rates increase as variants are more transmissible and can better evade our immune defenses.	con	
in the united states, the percentage of new covid-19 infection cases have continued to decrease nationally since mid-july.	2_1.5.2.3.	In the United States, the percentage of new COVID-19 infection cases have continued to decrease nationally since mid-July.	pro	According to the CDC, this decrease is only 0.6%, which is not a hopeful decrease in COVID-19 infection cases.
according to the cdc, this decrease is only 0.6%, which is not a hopeful decrease in covid-19 infection cases.	2_1.5.2.3.1.	According to the CDC, this decrease is only 0.6%, which is not a hopeful decrease in COVID-19 infection cases.	con	
experts estimate that 60-90% of a country's population must have immunity to a disease for it to stop spreading. in most countries, these percentages are still too low.	2_1.5.3.	Experts estimate that 60-90% of a country's population must have immunity to a disease for it to stop spreading. In most countries, these percentages are still too low.	con	As the number of cases in many countries continue to rise rapidly, it might just be a few months until a majority of the population is infected.	The US population is about 330 million and 90% of that is 297 million. As of 21 August 2020, the number of cases in the US are still 5.7 million.
as the number of cases in many countries continue to rise rapidly, it might just be a few months until a majority of the population is infected.	2_1.5.3.1.	As the number of cases in many countries continue to rise rapidly, it might just be a few months until a majority of the population is infected.	pro	
the us population is about 330 million and 90% of that is 297 million. as of 21 august 2020, the number of cases in the us are still 5.7 million.	2_1.5.3.2.	The US population is about 330 million and 90% of that is 297 million. As of 21 August 2020, the number of cases in the US are still 5.7 million.	con	
recent reports of people catching covid-19 multiple times could mean long-term immunity to the virus isn't possible.	2_1.6.	Recent reports of people catching COVID-19 multiple times could mean long-term immunity to the virus isn't possible.	con	According to many sources, reinfection is unlikely.	Many of these reports are anecdotal and therefore, cannot be taken as fact.	An Israeli doctor was reinfected in July 2020 after recovering from COVID-19 three months earlier.	Health authorities and experts have states that the chances of recovered COVID-19 patients getting reinfected are “very rare”.	Research suggests that COVID-19 reinfection, though usually mild and only happening in a fraction of people, is possible after a period of months or years.
according to many sources, reinfection is unlikely.	2_1.6.1.	According to many sources, reinfection is unlikely.	pro	According to the CDC, "the risk of \[COVID-19\] reinfection may be lower in the first 3 months after initial infection, based on limited evidence from another betacoronavirus (HCoV-OC43), the genus to which SARS-CoV-2 belongs."	A study conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) found that "acquired immunity prevents COVID-19 reinfections​."
according to the cdc, "the risk of \[covid-19\] reinfection may be lower in the first 3 months after initial infection, based on limited evidence from another betacoronavirus (hcov-oc43), the genus to which sars-cov-2 belongs."	2_1.6.1.1.	According to the CDC, "the risk of \[COVID-19\] reinfection may be lower in the first 3 months after initial infection, based on limited evidence from another betacoronavirus (HCoV-OC43), the genus to which SARS-CoV-2 belongs."	con	
a study conducted by the national institutes of health (nih) found that "acquired immunity prevents covid-19 reinfections​."	2_1.6.1.2.	A study conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) found that "acquired immunity prevents COVID-19 reinfections​."	pro	
many of these reports are anecdotal and therefore, cannot be taken as fact.	2_1.6.2.	Many of these reports are anecdotal and therefore, cannot be taken as fact.	pro	Scientists believe that some COVID-19 tests are unreliable and can throw false positives.
scientists believe that some covid-19 tests are unreliable and can throw false positives.	2_1.6.2.1.	Scientists believe that some COVID-19 tests are unreliable and can throw false positives.	pro	
an israeli doctor was reinfected in july 2020 after recovering from covid-19 three months earlier.	2_1.6.3.	An Israeli doctor was reinfected in July 2020 after recovering from COVID-19 three months earlier.	con	
health authorities and experts have states that the chances of recovered covid-19 patients getting reinfected are “very rare”.	2_1.6.4.	Health authorities and experts have states that the chances of recovered COVID-19 patients getting reinfected are “very rare”.	pro	
research suggests that covid-19 reinfection, though usually mild and only happening in a fraction of people, is possible after a period of months or years.	2_1.6.5.	Research suggests that COVID-19 reinfection, though usually mild and only happening in a fraction of people, is possible after a period of months or years.	con	
it should be compulsory for those working with the elderly to take a covid-19 vaccine	3_1.	It should be compulsory for those working with the elderly to take a COVID-19 vaccine	pro	It is the job of care home workers to protect the elderly they work with. If they do not want to get vaccinated, they are free to choose a different profession.	Getting vaccinated will not only help the elderly but the wider population as well. It is our duty as citizens to prevent the spread of this virus.	We are still unsure of the side effects of the COVID-19 vaccines. At this moment in time, it should only be willing volunteers taking the vaccine, due to the risks it may pose.	The elderly are much more likely to suffer from/ die from COVID-19. We must ensure their safety by vaccinating those around them.	Getting vaccinated should be an individual choice. Governments cannot force this upon its citizens, regardless of their occupation.	It would be difficult to regulate the administering of the vaccine.
it is the job of care home workers to protect the elderly they work with. if they do not want to get vaccinated, they are free to choose a different profession.	3_1.1.	It is the job of care home workers to protect the elderly they work with. If they do not want to get vaccinated, they are free to choose a different profession.	pro	Given the havoc wreaked by COVID-19 on the job market, in practice care home workers would not be free to choose a different profession. In practice, they would be forced to choose between being vaccinated against their will or indefinite unemployment.	Care home workers have a well-established legal duty of care to their patients.	In order to be protected, the elderly should opt to get vaccinated themselves.
given the havoc wreaked by covid-19 on the job market, in practice care home workers would not be free to choose a different profession. in practice, they would be forced to choose between being vaccinated against their will or indefinite unemployment.	3_1.1.1.	Given the havoc wreaked by COVID-19 on the job market, in practice care home workers would not be free to choose a different profession. In practice, they would be forced to choose between being vaccinated against their will or indefinite unemployment.	con	Once the furlough scheme comes to an end in the UK, unemployment is expected to skyrocket.	As healthcare workers, care home workers are in high demand. Therefore, they are unlikely to be unemployed for long.
once the furlough scheme comes to an end in the uk, unemployment is expected to skyrocket.	3_1.1.1.1.	Once the furlough scheme comes to an end in the UK, unemployment is expected to skyrocket.	con	
as healthcare workers, care home workers are in high demand. therefore, they are unlikely to be unemployed for long.	3_1.1.1.2.	As healthcare workers, care home workers are in high demand. Therefore, they are unlikely to be unemployed for long.	pro	
care home workers have a well-established legal duty of care to their patients.	3_1.1.2.	Care home workers have a well-established legal duty of care to their patients.	pro	
in order to be protected, the elderly should opt to get vaccinated themselves.	3_1.1.3.	In order to be protected, the elderly should opt to get vaccinated themselves.	con	
getting vaccinated will not only help the elderly but the wider population as well. it is our duty as citizens to prevent the spread of this virus.	3_1.2.	Getting vaccinated will not only help the elderly but the wider population as well. It is our duty as citizens to prevent the spread of this virus.	pro	If care workers interact other people while infected, they are likely to spread the virus.	In the same way that building-site workers are required to wear hard hats or operating-theatre workers are mandated to wear face masks. It should be compulsory for all those whom work in places where they can either be endangered, themselves, or where they can endanger others.	Getting a vaccine does not prevent spread of the virus but lessens the affects caused by the virus. Those that have been vaccinated are just as susceptible to carry and pass on the virus as someone who has not had a vaccine.
if care workers interact other people while infected, they are likely to spread the virus.	3_1.2.1.	If care workers interact other people while infected, they are likely to spread the virus.	pro	This problem is not exclusive to care workers but applies to anyone. Hence, care workers in particular shouldn't be forced to take the vaccine.
this problem is not exclusive to care workers but applies to anyone. hence, care workers in particular shouldn't be forced to take the vaccine.	3_1.2.1.1.	This problem is not exclusive to care workers but applies to anyone. Hence, care workers in particular shouldn't be forced to take the vaccine.	con	
in the same way that building-site workers are required to wear hard hats or operating-theatre workers are mandated to wear face masks. it should be compulsory for all those whom work in places where they can either be endangered, themselves, or where they can endanger others.	3_1.2.2.	In the same way that building-site workers are required to wear hard hats or operating-theatre workers are mandated to wear face masks. It should be compulsory for all those whom work in places where they can either be endangered, themselves, or where they can endanger others.	pro	
getting a vaccine does not prevent spread of the virus but lessens the affects caused by the virus. those that have been vaccinated are just as susceptible to carry and pass on the virus as someone who has not had a vaccine.	3_1.2.3.	Getting a vaccine does not prevent spread of the virus but lessens the affects caused by the virus. Those that have been vaccinated are just as susceptible to carry and pass on the virus as someone who has not had a vaccine.	con	Effective COVID-19 vaccines prevent the majority of people from contracting the virus. If a person does not contract the virus at all, they will not be able to pass it on to others.	Vaccinations significantly reduce viral load, which reduces the contagiousness of COVID-19.
effective covid-19 vaccines prevent the majority of people from contracting the virus. if a person does not contract the virus at all, they will not be able to pass it on to others.	3_1.2.3.1.	Effective COVID-19 vaccines prevent the majority of people from contracting the virus. If a person does not contract the virus at all, they will not be able to pass it on to others.	pro	
vaccinations significantly reduce viral load, which reduces the contagiousness of covid-19.	3_1.2.3.2.	Vaccinations significantly reduce viral load, which reduces the contagiousness of COVID-19.	pro	
we are still unsure of the side effects of the covid-19 vaccines. at this moment in time, it should only be willing volunteers taking the vaccine, due to the risks it may pose.	3_1.3.	We are still unsure of the side effects of the COVID-19 vaccines. At this moment in time, it should only be willing volunteers taking the vaccine, due to the risks it may pose.	con	An extensive safety network is in place to ensure that the vaccines are safe to use.	Some people who have received the vaccine produced by Pfizer and BioNtech have had "severe allergy-like reactions".	The vaccine was approved only after it underwent trials that assessed its safety.	The vaccines have been deemed safe by regulators.
an extensive safety network is in place to ensure that the vaccines are safe to use.	3_1.3.1.	An extensive safety network is in place to ensure that the vaccines are safe to use.	pro	
some people who have received the vaccine produced by pfizer and biontech have had "severe allergy-like reactions".	3_1.3.2.	Some people who have received the vaccine produced by Pfizer and BioNtech have had "severe allergy-like reactions".	con	These reactions are rare, only occurring in 11.1 cases out of 1 million for the vaccine.	Precautions are being taken to protect those with allergies.
these reactions are rare, only occurring in 11.1 cases out of 1 million for the vaccine.	3_1.3.2.1.	These reactions are rare, only occurring in 11.1 cases out of 1 million for the vaccine.	pro	
precautions are being taken to protect those with allergies.	3_1.3.2.2.	Precautions are being taken to protect those with allergies.	pro	Moderna (p.2) and Pfizer (p.2) have made ingredient lists for their vaccines available so individuals can confirm whether or not they are allergic to the vaccine before it is administered.	CDC guidance includes screening individuals receiving the COVID-19 vaccine for contraindications and precautions.	CDC guidance recommends that supplies needed to manage anaphylaxis (such as EpiPens) be available at centers administering COVID-19 vaccines.
moderna (p.2) and pfizer (p.2) have made ingredient lists for their vaccines available so individuals can confirm whether or not they are allergic to the vaccine before it is administered.	3_1.3.2.2.1.	Moderna (p.2) and Pfizer (p.2) have made ingredient lists for their vaccines available so individuals can confirm whether or not they are allergic to the vaccine before it is administered.	pro	
cdc guidance includes screening individuals receiving the covid-19 vaccine for contraindications and precautions.	3_1.3.2.2.2.	CDC guidance includes screening individuals receiving the COVID-19 vaccine for contraindications and precautions.	pro	
cdc guidance recommends that supplies needed to manage anaphylaxis (such as epipens) be available at centers administering covid-19 vaccines.	3_1.3.2.2.3.	CDC guidance recommends that supplies needed to manage anaphylaxis (such as EpiPens) be available at centers administering COVID-19 vaccines.	pro	
the vaccine was approved only after it underwent trials that assessed its safety.	3_1.3.3.	The vaccine was approved only after it underwent trials that assessed its safety.	pro	The vaccines underwent phase 3 trials, which assess the side effects of drugs, and were determined to have no serious side effects.
the vaccines underwent phase 3 trials, which assess the side effects of drugs, and were determined to have no serious side effects.	3_1.3.3.1.	The vaccines underwent phase 3 trials, which assess the side effects of drugs, and were determined to have no serious side effects.	pro	
the vaccines have been deemed safe by regulators.	3_1.3.4.	The vaccines have been deemed safe by regulators.	pro	The FDA approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine.	Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine after carefully evaluating its safety.	Vaccine approval is being rushed due to the intense pressure that they are facing to approve of a treatment.
the fda approved the use of the pfizer vaccine.	3_1.3.4.1.	The FDA approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine.	pro	
health canada authorized the use of the pfizer vaccine after carefully evaluating its safety.	3_1.3.4.2.	Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine after carefully evaluating its safety.	pro	
vaccine approval is being rushed due to the intense pressure that they are facing to approve of a treatment.	3_1.3.4.3.	Vaccine approval is being rushed due to the intense pressure that they are facing to approve of a treatment.	con	
the elderly are much more likely to suffer from/ die from covid-19. we must ensure their safety by vaccinating those around them.	3_1.4.	The elderly are much more likely to suffer from/ die from COVID-19. We must ensure their safety by vaccinating those around them.	pro	The death rate, due to COVID-19, progressively increases for people over the age of 50(95 percent of COVID-19 deaths in the U.S. have occurred among people who were 50 or older.).	As people become older, their immune systems weaken. Therefore, they are likely to be affected much worse by infections.
the death rate, due to covid-19, progressively increases for people over the age of 50(95 percent of covid-19 deaths in the u.s. have occurred among people who were 50 or older.).	3_1.4.1.	The death rate, due to COVID-19, progressively increases for people over the age of 50(95 percent of COVID-19 deaths in the U.S. have occurred among people who were 50 or older.).	pro	
as people become older, their immune systems weaken. therefore, they are likely to be affected much worse by infections.	3_1.4.2.	As people become older, their immune systems weaken. Therefore, they are likely to be affected much worse by infections.	pro	
getting vaccinated should be an individual choice. governments cannot force this upon its citizens, regardless of their occupation.	3_1.5.	Getting vaccinated should be an individual choice. Governments cannot force this upon its citizens, regardless of their occupation.	con	People who choose to work in public healthcare systems are tacitly consenting to occupational requirements imposed by government since the government is in charge of public healthcare.	The freedom to choose is a foundational principle for democratic states.
people who choose to work in public healthcare systems are tacitly consenting to occupational requirements imposed by government since the government is in charge of public healthcare.	3_1.5.1.	People who choose to work in public healthcare systems are tacitly consenting to occupational requirements imposed by government since the government is in charge of public healthcare.	pro	
the freedom to choose is a foundational principle for democratic states.	3_1.5.2.	The freedom to choose is a foundational principle for democratic states.	con	
it would be difficult to regulate the administering of the vaccine.	3_1.6.	It would be difficult to regulate the administering of the vaccine.	con	Although there may be grey areas, there are some clear scenarios in which people are "working with the elderly", such as those who work in care homes.	It would be disproportionate to allow potential definitional grey areas to thwart attempts to protect the elderly from COVID-19.	Given that compulsory vaccination encroaches on bodily autonomy, it is only fair that the associated regulations are well-defined.	Factors such as time spent with the elderly, the age of the client, or the health of the client would all need to be assessed, which can be difficult to do.
although there may be grey areas, there are some clear scenarios in which people are "working with the elderly", such as those who work in care homes.	3_1.6.1.	Although there may be grey areas, there are some clear scenarios in which people are "working with the elderly", such as those who work in care homes.	pro	
it would be disproportionate to allow potential definitional grey areas to thwart attempts to protect the elderly from covid-19.	3_1.6.2.	It would be disproportionate to allow potential definitional grey areas to thwart attempts to protect the elderly from COVID-19.	pro	
given that compulsory vaccination encroaches on bodily autonomy, it is only fair that the associated regulations are well-defined.	3_1.6.3.	Given that compulsory vaccination encroaches on bodily autonomy, it is only fair that the associated regulations are well-defined.	con	
factors such as time spent with the elderly, the age of the client, or the health of the client would all need to be assessed, which can be difficult to do.	3_1.6.4.	Factors such as time spent with the elderly, the age of the client, or the health of the client would all need to be assessed, which can be difficult to do.	con	
covid-19 vaccines should be mandatory.	4_1.	COVID-19 vaccines should be mandatory.	pro	Mandatory vaccines would be a huge overreach of state powers.	Mandatory vaccine policies have proved extremely helpful in the fight against other preventable illnesses.	A mandatory vaccine policy would vastly increase already present inequalities in medical treatment.	Providing vaccinations to an entire population requires huge amounts of resources which can otherwise be used towards addressing more urgent public health issues.	The quickest and safest way to develop herd immunity is through a mandatory vaccination policy.	Despite a wide variety of attempted measures, COVID-19 has continued to spread at a dangerous rate - vaccines are the best remaining option to protect and improve our lives.
mandatory vaccines would be a huge overreach of state powers.	4_1.1.	Mandatory vaccines would be a huge overreach of state powers.	con	It is an infringement of the right to personal autonomy.	Other measures towards reducing the spread of COVID-19, such as an economic lockdown, compulsory masks and social distancing, are a greater and more continued overreach of state power than mandatory vaccination.	It is a duty of the state to protect its citizens from life-threatening diseases such as COVID-19.	Mandatory vaccinations can be enforced through non-state actors such as workplaces, stores and privately owned public spaces, which could require a proof of vaccination for entry.	The state should not mandate its citizens to undertake tasks that may carry a risk of harm.	Forcing citizens to undergo a medical procedure against their will increases mistrust in public institutions and increases the influence of the anti-vaccination movement.	Making COVID-19 vaccinations mandatory entails that people who do not get vaccinated will be penalized for not doing so. This can be considered unfair to some people.	The state already makes certain vaccines a requirement for attending public schools or holding certain positions.
it is an infringement of the right to personal autonomy.	4_1.1.1.	It is an infringement of the right to personal autonomy.	con	Right to personal autonomy includes the right to bodily integrity: which means that every person can choose what can and cannot be done to their bodies.	Personal autonomy ends when an individual's actions harm others (pp. 197-198), such as disrupting the creation of herd immunity for COVID-19.	In some cases, refusing vaccination can be a part of one's right to religious beliefs.	This would be unconstitutional based on freedom of privacy, and contrary to the constitutional principles arrived at in Roe vs Wade.	The state should instead consider less intrusive policies such as requiring compulsory vaccinations for only certain high-risk population groups.
right to personal autonomy includes the right to bodily integrity: which means that every person can choose what can and cannot be done to their bodies.	4_1.1.1.1.	Right to personal autonomy includes the right to bodily integrity: which means that every person can choose what can and cannot be done to their bodies.	con	The right to bodily integrity does not include situations where public health is protected and safeguarded by undergoing a medical procedure.
the right to bodily integrity does not include situations where public health is protected and safeguarded by undergoing a medical procedure.	4_1.1.1.1.1.	The right to bodily integrity does not include situations where public health is protected and safeguarded by undergoing a medical procedure.	pro	In Australia, a public health act permits the state to compel people to undergo medical treatment or procedures in order to address a public health issue.
in australia, a public health act permits the state to compel people to undergo medical treatment or procedures in order to address a public health issue.	4_1.1.1.1.1.1.	In Australia, a public health act permits the state to compel people to undergo medical treatment or procedures in order to address a public health issue.	pro	
personal autonomy ends when an individual's actions harm others (pp. 197-198), such as disrupting the creation of herd immunity for covid-19.	4_1.1.1.2.	Personal autonomy ends when an individual's actions harm others (pp. 197-198), such as disrupting the creation of herd immunity for COVID-19.	pro	It is impossible to unequivocally determine that abstaining from vaccination is guaranteed to harm others or prevent eventual herd immunity. Individuals' lifestyles and biologies are too complex and variable to justify such a blanket assumption as a precedent for legal violation of bodily autonomy.	Disrupting the creation of herd immunity is comparable to disregarding traffic lights. If even one person does it, it disrupts the flow of traffic and puts several people at enormous risk. It is justified that such action is curbed even at the cost of personal autonomy.	It is selfish to not want to save other lives.	In Jacobson v. Massachusetts, the US Supreme Court explained that rights under the US constitution are not absolute and vaccination can be enforced when there is a reasonable case made towards safeguarding public health and lives.
it is impossible to unequivocally determine that abstaining from vaccination is guaranteed to harm others or prevent eventual herd immunity. individuals' lifestyles and biologies are too complex and variable to justify such a blanket assumption as a precedent for legal violation of bodily autonomy.	4_1.1.1.2.1.	It is impossible to unequivocally determine that abstaining from vaccination is guaranteed to harm others or prevent eventual herd immunity. Individuals' lifestyles and biologies are too complex and variable to justify such a blanket assumption as a precedent for legal violation of bodily autonomy.	con	
disrupting the creation of herd immunity is comparable to disregarding traffic lights. if even one person does it, it disrupts the flow of traffic and puts several people at enormous risk. it is justified that such action is curbed even at the cost of personal autonomy.	4_1.1.1.2.2.	Disrupting the creation of herd immunity is comparable to disregarding traffic lights. If even one person does it, it disrupts the flow of traffic and puts several people at enormous risk. It is justified that such action is curbed even at the cost of personal autonomy.	pro	
it is selfish to not want to save other lives.	4_1.1.1.2.3.	It is selfish to not want to save other lives.	pro	Selfishness is determined by the individual. It wouldn't be selfish to act in your own safety, since you may have responsibilities towards family or community
selfishness is determined by the individual. it wouldn't be selfish to act in your own safety, since you may have responsibilities towards family or community	4_1.1.1.2.3.1.	Selfishness is determined by the individual. It wouldn't be selfish to act in your own safety, since you may have responsibilities towards family or community	con	
in jacobson v. massachusetts, the us supreme court explained that rights under the us constitution are not absolute and vaccination can be enforced when there is a reasonable case made towards safeguarding public health and lives.	4_1.1.1.2.4.	In Jacobson v. Massachusetts, the US Supreme Court explained that rights under the US constitution are not absolute and vaccination can be enforced when there is a reasonable case made towards safeguarding public health and lives.	pro	
in some cases, refusing vaccination can be a part of one's right to religious beliefs.	4_1.1.1.3.	In some cases, refusing vaccination can be a part of one's right to religious beliefs.	con	
this would be unconstitutional based on freedom of privacy, and contrary to the constitutional principles arrived at in roe vs wade.	4_1.1.1.4.	This would be unconstitutional based on freedom of privacy, and contrary to the constitutional principles arrived at in Roe vs Wade.	con	
the state should instead consider less intrusive policies such as requiring compulsory vaccinations for only certain high-risk population groups.	4_1.1.1.5.	The state should instead consider less intrusive policies such as requiring compulsory vaccinations for only certain high-risk population groups.	con	The elderly, who are considered high-risk for COVID-19, have weaker immune system functionality. Vaccinations are likely to be less effective with them. Therefore, a better option is to immunize a large enough part of the population so as to achieve herd immunity.
the elderly, who are considered high-risk for covid-19, have weaker immune system functionality. vaccinations are likely to be less effective with them. therefore, a better option is to immunize a large enough part of the population so as to achieve herd immunity.	4_1.1.1.5.1.	The elderly, who are considered high-risk for COVID-19, have weaker immune system functionality. Vaccinations are likely to be less effective with them. Therefore, a better option is to immunize a large enough part of the population so as to achieve herd immunity.	pro	
other measures towards reducing the spread of covid-19, such as an economic lockdown, compulsory masks and social distancing, are a greater and more continued overreach of state power than mandatory vaccination.	4_1.1.2.	Other measures towards reducing the spread of COVID-19, such as an economic lockdown, compulsory masks and social distancing, are a greater and more continued overreach of state power than mandatory vaccination.	pro	Unnecessary use of state power can upset the balance between individual rights and community well-being.	Locking down the economy and restricting people's right to movement is a huge infringement of personal liberty.
unnecessary use of state power can upset the balance between individual rights and community well-being.	4_1.1.2.1.	Unnecessary use of state power can upset the balance between individual rights and community well-being.	pro	Use of state power has been justified when it is needed to regulate private rights in the public interest.	Use of public policy regulations is only one "lever" of many for the promotion of public well-being.
use of state power has been justified when it is needed to regulate private rights in the public interest.	4_1.1.2.1.1.	Use of state power has been justified when it is needed to regulate private rights in the public interest.	con	
use of public policy regulations is only one "lever" of many for the promotion of public well-being.	4_1.1.2.1.2.	Use of public policy regulations is only one "lever" of many for the promotion of public well-being.	pro	
locking down the economy and restricting people's right to movement is a huge infringement of personal liberty.	4_1.1.2.2.	Locking down the economy and restricting people's right to movement is a huge infringement of personal liberty.	pro	In poorer countries, like India, people died not just as a result of COVID-19 but also due to the impact of the lockdown and the manner in which it was enforced.
in poorer countries, like india, people died not just as a result of covid-19 but also due to the impact of the lockdown and the manner in which it was enforced.	4_1.1.2.2.1.	In poorer countries, like India, people died not just as a result of COVID-19 but also due to the impact of the lockdown and the manner in which it was enforced.	pro	
it is a duty of the state to protect its citizens from life-threatening diseases such as covid-19.	4_1.1.3.	It is a duty of the state to protect its citizens from life-threatening diseases such as COVID-19.	pro	Providing healthcare is best left to the market. Government interference in healthcare creates inefficiency and dependency.	There is already a precedent for the state passing laws governing bodily choices in the name of public safety, such as banning the use of methamphetamine.
providing healthcare is best left to the market. government interference in healthcare creates inefficiency and dependency.	4_1.1.3.1.	Providing healthcare is best left to the market. Government interference in healthcare creates inefficiency and dependency.	con	The market is profit-oriented and as such, seldom caters to people's need for safety and affordability.
the market is profit-oriented and as such, seldom caters to people's need for safety and affordability.	4_1.1.3.1.1.	The market is profit-oriented and as such, seldom caters to people's need for safety and affordability.	pro	
there is already a precedent for the state passing laws governing bodily choices in the name of public safety, such as banning the use of methamphetamine.	4_1.1.3.2.	There is already a precedent for the state passing laws governing bodily choices in the name of public safety, such as banning the use of methamphetamine.	pro	
mandatory vaccinations can be enforced through non-state actors such as workplaces, stores and privately owned public spaces, which could require a proof of vaccination for entry.	4_1.1.4.	Mandatory vaccinations can be enforced through non-state actors such as workplaces, stores and privately owned public spaces, which could require a proof of vaccination for entry.	pro	Airlines sometimes require "fitness to fly" certificate from passengers flying with them. This could be extended to include proof of immunization from COVID-19.	Refusing entry to schools and workplaces could infringe upon other rights such as the right to education or the right to employment.	Even if a product offers benefits, the state should not force it upon an entire population. This is akin to mandating that all tech customers should only purchase Microsoft products because they are beneficial.	There has been protracted discussion in the media and in governments across the world about a vaccine visa.
airlines sometimes require "fitness to fly" certificate from passengers flying with them. this could be extended to include proof of immunization from covid-19.	4_1.1.4.1.	Airlines sometimes require "fitness to fly" certificate from passengers flying with them. This could be extended to include proof of immunization from COVID-19.	pro	Many countries are required to present proof of vaccination from diseases such as polio and malaria when applying for a visa (p. 3).
many countries are required to present proof of vaccination from diseases such as polio and malaria when applying for a visa (p. 3).	4_1.1.4.1.1.	Many countries are required to present proof of vaccination from diseases such as polio and malaria when applying for a visa (p. 3).	pro	
refusing entry to schools and workplaces could infringe upon other rights such as the right to education or the right to employment.	4_1.1.4.2.	Refusing entry to schools and workplaces could infringe upon other rights such as the right to education or the right to employment.	con	Homeschooling options are available to those who are denied admission or entry into schools. As for workplaces, the COVID-19 pandemic has paved the way for more and more employees to work from home.
homeschooling options are available to those who are denied admission or entry into schools. as for workplaces, the covid-19 pandemic has paved the way for more and more employees to work from home.	4_1.1.4.2.1.	Homeschooling options are available to those who are denied admission or entry into schools. As for workplaces, the COVID-19 pandemic has paved the way for more and more employees to work from home.	pro	
even if a product offers benefits, the state should not force it upon an entire population. this is akin to mandating that all tech customers should only purchase microsoft products because they are beneficial.	4_1.1.4.3.	Even if a product offers benefits, the state should not force it upon an entire population. This is akin to mandating that all tech customers should only purchase Microsoft products because they are beneficial.	con	
there has been protracted discussion in the media and in governments across the world about a vaccine visa.	4_1.1.4.4.	There has been protracted discussion in the media and in governments across the world about a vaccine visa.	pro	Proof of immunization from COVID-19 is already being added as a requirement to enter a number of EU countries.
proof of immunization from covid-19 is already being added as a requirement to enter a number of eu countries.	4_1.1.4.4.1.	Proof of immunization from COVID-19 is already being added as a requirement to enter a number of EU countries.	pro	
the state should not mandate its citizens to undertake tasks that may carry a risk of harm.	4_1.1.5.	The state should not mandate its citizens to undertake tasks that may carry a risk of harm.	con	Around 80% of those who get infected with COVID-19 experience either mild or no illness. It is not justified for people to be asked to take risks, even minimal ones, for the sake of the 20% who are vulnerable.	Many countries are pushing to rush testing of the COVID-19 vaccine, opening the possibility for unintended harmful side effects.	Many countries currently enforce drafts or mandatory military service, an extremely risky endeavor.	A number of people are suspected to have died in Norway on account of taking the vaccine.
around 80% of those who get infected with covid-19 experience either mild or no illness. it is not justified for people to be asked to take risks, even minimal ones, for the sake of the 20% who are vulnerable.	4_1.1.5.1.	Around 80% of those who get infected with COVID-19 experience either mild or no illness. It is not justified for people to be asked to take risks, even minimal ones, for the sake of the 20% who are vulnerable.	con	People are typically immunized for a disease even when they are not particularly vulnerable to it.
people are typically immunized for a disease even when they are not particularly vulnerable to it.	4_1.1.5.1.1.	People are typically immunized for a disease even when they are not particularly vulnerable to it.	pro	Rubella causes only mild illness in most people but when contracted by pregnant women it can result in serious birth defects. Therefore, many countries immunize children, who are already born, towards rubella to protect pregnant women and fetuses.
rubella causes only mild illness in most people but when contracted by pregnant women it can result in serious birth defects. therefore, many countries immunize children, who are already born, towards rubella to protect pregnant women and fetuses.	4_1.1.5.1.1.1.	Rubella causes only mild illness in most people but when contracted by pregnant women it can result in serious birth defects. Therefore, many countries immunize children, who are already born, towards rubella to protect pregnant women and fetuses.	pro	
many countries are pushing to rush testing of the covid-19 vaccine, opening the possibility for unintended harmful side effects.	4_1.1.5.2.	Many countries are pushing to rush testing of the COVID-19 vaccine, opening the possibility for unintended harmful side effects.	con	Some vaccines end up worsening the effects of the illness, a phenomenon called antibody-dependant enhancement. This has occurred as recently as 2016 with a drug, Dengavxia, intended to protect kids from dengue which ultimately increased hospitalizations for the virus.	At least one pharmaceutical manufacturer of a potential COVID-19 vaccine skipped animal testing, an important safety protocol in typical vaccine development processes.	The World Health Organization has stated that the "fast-tracking \[of the vaccine\] does not mean a compromise on safety or efficacy."	Two of the major vaccines have over 90% efficacy, which means that they will dramatically reduce the likelihood of infection.
some vaccines end up worsening the effects of the illness, a phenomenon called antibody-dependant enhancement. this has occurred as recently as 2016 with a drug, dengavxia, intended to protect kids from dengue which ultimately increased hospitalizations for the virus.	4_1.1.5.2.1.	Some vaccines end up worsening the effects of the illness, a phenomenon called antibody-dependant enhancement. This has occurred as recently as 2016 with a drug, Dengavxia, intended to protect kids from dengue which ultimately increased hospitalizations for the virus.	con	Scientists have already observed antibodies typical of ADE in the blood of some COVID-19 survivors.	The occurrence of ADE for the use of Dengavxia, which was produced prior to the pandemic, indicates that even when normal procedures are followed, there is still a risk attached to a new product.
scientists have already observed antibodies typical of ade in the blood of some covid-19 survivors.	4_1.1.5.2.1.1.	Scientists have already observed antibodies typical of ADE in the blood of some COVID-19 survivors.	con	
the occurrence of ade for the use of dengavxia, which was produced prior to the pandemic, indicates that even when normal procedures are followed, there is still a risk attached to a new product.	4_1.1.5.2.1.2.	The occurrence of ADE for the use of Dengavxia, which was produced prior to the pandemic, indicates that even when normal procedures are followed, there is still a risk attached to a new product.	pro	
at least one pharmaceutical manufacturer of a potential covid-19 vaccine skipped animal testing, an important safety protocol in typical vaccine development processes.	4_1.1.5.2.2.	At least one pharmaceutical manufacturer of a potential COVID-19 vaccine skipped animal testing, an important safety protocol in typical vaccine development processes.	con	Rumours about manufacturers skipping animal testing are patently untrue.
rumours about manufacturers skipping animal testing are patently untrue.	4_1.1.5.2.2.1.	Rumours about manufacturers skipping animal testing are patently untrue.	pro	
the world health organization has stated that the "fast-tracking \[of the vaccine\] does not mean a compromise on safety or efficacy."	4_1.1.5.2.3.	The World Health Organization has stated that the "fast-tracking \[of the vaccine\] does not mean a compromise on safety or efficacy."	pro	
two of the major vaccines have over 90% efficacy, which means that they will dramatically reduce the likelihood of infection.	4_1.1.5.2.4.	Two of the major vaccines have over 90% efficacy, which means that they will dramatically reduce the likelihood of infection.	pro	In current clinical trials, pharmaceutical company Moderna has observed stable antibody retention for a significant period of time after their COVID-19 vaccine was administered.	The Moderna vaccine has been shown to confer 95% protection against COVID-19 infection.	The Sinopharm vaccine has only 79% efficacy.	The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine is 95% effective.	There are multiple COVID-19 vaccines, all with different levels of efficacy.
in current clinical trials, pharmaceutical company moderna has observed stable antibody retention for a significant period of time after their covid-19 vaccine was administered.	4_1.1.5.2.4.1.	In current clinical trials, pharmaceutical company Moderna has observed stable antibody retention for a significant period of time after their COVID-19 vaccine was administered.	pro	
the moderna vaccine has been shown to confer 95% protection against covid-19 infection.	4_1.1.5.2.4.2.	The Moderna vaccine has been shown to confer 95% protection against COVID-19 infection.	pro	
the sinopharm vaccine has only 79% efficacy.	4_1.1.5.2.4.3.	The Sinopharm vaccine has only 79% efficacy.	con	
the pfizer-biontech vaccine is 95% effective.	4_1.1.5.2.4.4.	The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine is 95% effective.	pro	
there are multiple covid-19 vaccines, all with different levels of efficacy.	4_1.1.5.2.4.5.	There are multiple COVID-19 vaccines, all with different levels of efficacy.	con	
many countries currently enforce drafts or mandatory military service, an extremely risky endeavor.	4_1.1.5.3.	Many countries currently enforce drafts or mandatory military service, an extremely risky endeavor.	pro	Even if the state is infringing on its citizens' rights, doesn't make it right to infringe even more. Two wrongs doesn't make a right.	The draft in the United States was ended by Congress in 1973, and is generally recognized as being antithetical to the philosophy of personal liberty espoused by the U.S. constitution.	Over 35 nations require some form of compulsory military service for at least one year's time.	Military service is for maintaining the sovereignty of the whole state. It has a higher purpose and a resulting loss of life that brings glory to the martyr and their family. Illness and death due to the side effects of vaccinations are not glorious and is a sad loss. Hence both mandates are not comparable.
even if the state is infringing on its citizens' rights, doesn't make it right to infringe even more. two wrongs doesn't make a right.	4_1.1.5.3.1.	Even if the state is infringing on its citizens' rights, doesn't make it right to infringe even more. Two wrongs doesn't make a right.	con	
the draft in the united states was ended by congress in 1973, and is generally recognized as being antithetical to the philosophy of personal liberty espoused by the u.s. constitution.	4_1.1.5.3.2.	The draft in the United States was ended by Congress in 1973, and is generally recognized as being antithetical to the philosophy of personal liberty espoused by the U.S. constitution.	con	The U.S. still utilizes the selective service system, allowing for conscription of any able-bodied man over the age of 18 in times of war.
the u.s. still utilizes the selective service system, allowing for conscription of any able-bodied man over the age of 18 in times of war.	4_1.1.5.3.2.1.	The U.S. still utilizes the selective service system, allowing for conscription of any able-bodied man over the age of 18 in times of war.	pro	
over 35 nations require some form of compulsory military service for at least one year's time.	4_1.1.5.3.3.	Over 35 nations require some form of compulsory military service for at least one year's time.	pro	
military service is for maintaining the sovereignty of the whole state. it has a higher purpose and a resulting loss of life that brings glory to the martyr and their family. illness and death due to the side effects of vaccinations are not glorious and is a sad loss. hence both mandates are not comparable.	4_1.1.5.3.4.	Military service is for maintaining the sovereignty of the whole state. It has a higher purpose and a resulting loss of life that brings glory to the martyr and their family. Illness and death due to the side effects of vaccinations are not glorious and is a sad loss. Hence both mandates are not comparable.	con	Healthcare workers who have lost lives in the fight against the pandemic are sometimes treated as martyrs. The same can be the case for people who face side-effects of vaccines.
healthcare workers who have lost lives in the fight against the pandemic are sometimes treated as martyrs. the same can be the case for people who face side-effects of vaccines.	4_1.1.5.3.4.1.	Healthcare workers who have lost lives in the fight against the pandemic are sometimes treated as martyrs. The same can be the case for people who face side-effects of vaccines.	pro	The workers who fight against the pandemic can also be vaccinated only if they need it. Mandating vaccination for them would be unnecessary and risky if they have already developed natural immunity. Following guidelines reduces the risk of spread significantly.
the workers who fight against the pandemic can also be vaccinated only if they need it. mandating vaccination for them would be unnecessary and risky if they have already developed natural immunity. following guidelines reduces the risk of spread significantly.	4_1.1.5.3.4.1.1.	The workers who fight against the pandemic can also be vaccinated only if they need it. Mandating vaccination for them would be unnecessary and risky if they have already developed natural immunity. Following guidelines reduces the risk of spread significantly.	con	
a number of people are suspected to have died in norway on account of taking the vaccine.	4_1.1.5.4.	A number of people are suspected to have died in Norway on account of taking the vaccine.	con	Those who have died are believed to have been incredibly frail and are not representative of how most people would react to receiving a vaccine.
those who have died are believed to have been incredibly frail and are not representative of how most people would react to receiving a vaccine.	4_1.1.5.4.1.	Those who have died are believed to have been incredibly frail and are not representative of how most people would react to receiving a vaccine.	pro	
forcing citizens to undergo a medical procedure against their will increases mistrust in public institutions and increases the influence of the anti-vaccination movement.	4_1.1.6.	Forcing citizens to undergo a medical procedure against their will increases mistrust in public institutions and increases the influence of the anti-vaccination movement.	con	In some countries, there might be resistance against having a mandatory vaccination policy. In the US, for instance, considering that people from some states are disproportionately against COVID-19 vaccination, it is unlikely that such states will agree to a mandatory vaccination policy.	If mandatory vaccination policy is carried out alongside a public education program, it would ease tensions by convincing more people of the benefits of vaccination.
in some countries, there might be resistance against having a mandatory vaccination policy. in the us, for instance, considering that people from some states are disproportionately against covid-19 vaccination, it is unlikely that such states will agree to a mandatory vaccination policy.	4_1.1.6.1.	In some countries, there might be resistance against having a mandatory vaccination policy. In the US, for instance, considering that people from some states are disproportionately against COVID-19 vaccination, it is unlikely that such states will agree to a mandatory vaccination policy.	con	
if mandatory vaccination policy is carried out alongside a public education program, it would ease tensions by convincing more people of the benefits of vaccination.	4_1.1.6.2.	If mandatory vaccination policy is carried out alongside a public education program, it would ease tensions by convincing more people of the benefits of vaccination.	pro	
making covid-19 vaccinations mandatory entails that people who do not get vaccinated will be penalized for not doing so. this can be considered unfair to some people.	4_1.1.7.	Making COVID-19 vaccinations mandatory entails that people who do not get vaccinated will be penalized for not doing so. This can be considered unfair to some people.	con	Not getting vaccinated for COVID-19 increases one's risk of getting infected and even dying. Penalty towards actions that put oneself at risk is justified in the same way as a penalty towards driving without a helmet is justified.	The government can reward behaviour by announcing financial incentives for those who choose to vaccinate. This is preferable and less intrusive than penalizing people for not vaccinating.	Penalizing for not vaccinating can increase existing inequities in health.	Practically, penalizing can take the form of restricted access to public places, limited job availability and reduced social benefits which can be seen as unfair.	Considering the benefits in terms of lives saved and improved public health, it is justified to penalize people who jeopardize these benefits.
not getting vaccinated for covid-19 increases one's risk of getting infected and even dying. penalty towards actions that put oneself at risk is justified in the same way as a penalty towards driving without a helmet is justified.	4_1.1.7.1.	Not getting vaccinated for COVID-19 increases one's risk of getting infected and even dying. Penalty towards actions that put oneself at risk is justified in the same way as a penalty towards driving without a helmet is justified.	con	People who smoke or consume alcohol are not penalized even if they are engaging in risky behaviour. This is because adults are free to make their own choices after considering the risks and rewards.	People who make unhealthy choices should not be seen as offenders but victims who need help and information that enables them to make better choices.
people who smoke or consume alcohol are not penalized even if they are engaging in risky behaviour. this is because adults are free to make their own choices after considering the risks and rewards.	4_1.1.7.1.1.	People who smoke or consume alcohol are not penalized even if they are engaging in risky behaviour. This is because adults are free to make their own choices after considering the risks and rewards.	pro	
people who make unhealthy choices should not be seen as offenders but victims who need help and information that enables them to make better choices.	4_1.1.7.1.2.	People who make unhealthy choices should not be seen as offenders but victims who need help and information that enables them to make better choices.	pro	
the government can reward behaviour by announcing financial incentives for those who choose to vaccinate. this is preferable and less intrusive than penalizing people for not vaccinating.	4_1.1.7.2.	The government can reward behaviour by announcing financial incentives for those who choose to vaccinate. This is preferable and less intrusive than penalizing people for not vaccinating.	pro	
penalizing for not vaccinating can increase existing inequities in health.	4_1.1.7.3.	Penalizing for not vaccinating can increase existing inequities in health.	con	If the vaccines are not provided free of cost, mandatory vaccination would mean that poorer communities bear higher burden in terms of giving up a share of their income towards purchasing them.	Fines imposed at a flat rate are inherently unjust.
if the vaccines are not provided free of cost, mandatory vaccination would mean that poorer communities bear higher burden in terms of giving up a share of their income towards purchasing them.	4_1.1.7.3.1.	If the vaccines are not provided free of cost, mandatory vaccination would mean that poorer communities bear higher burden in terms of giving up a share of their income towards purchasing them.	con	
fines imposed at a flat rate are inherently unjust.	4_1.1.7.3.2.	Fines imposed at a flat rate are inherently unjust.	con	
practically, penalizing can take the form of restricted access to public places, limited job availability and reduced social benefits which can be seen as unfair.	4_1.1.7.4.	Practically, penalizing can take the form of restricted access to public places, limited job availability and reduced social benefits which can be seen as unfair.	con	
considering the benefits in terms of lives saved and improved public health, it is justified to penalize people who jeopardize these benefits.	4_1.1.7.5.	Considering the benefits in terms of lives saved and improved public health, it is justified to penalize people who jeopardize these benefits.	pro	Those who reject COVID-19 vaccines are harming others through increased infection and death rate. Therefore, it is justified that such harmful behaviour is penalized.	Australian legislation withholding state benefits for those who did not vaccinate has increased immunization rates.
those who reject covid-19 vaccines are harming others through increased infection and death rate. therefore, it is justified that such harmful behaviour is penalized.	4_1.1.7.5.1.	Those who reject COVID-19 vaccines are harming others through increased infection and death rate. Therefore, it is justified that such harmful behaviour is penalized.	pro	Mandatory vaccination and the penalties that come with it are comparable to smoking in public. Penalties imposed on people smoking in places which do not allow it are justified in the light of improved quality of air and public health benefits it can bring.
mandatory vaccination and the penalties that come with it are comparable to smoking in public. penalties imposed on people smoking in places which do not allow it are justified in the light of improved quality of air and public health benefits it can bring.	4_1.1.7.5.1.1.	Mandatory vaccination and the penalties that come with it are comparable to smoking in public. Penalties imposed on people smoking in places which do not allow it are justified in the light of improved quality of air and public health benefits it can bring.	pro	
australian legislation withholding state benefits for those who did not vaccinate has increased immunization rates.	4_1.1.7.5.2.	Australian legislation withholding state benefits for those who did not vaccinate has increased immunization rates.	pro	
the state already makes certain vaccines a requirement for attending public schools or holding certain positions.	4_1.1.8.	The state already makes certain vaccines a requirement for attending public schools or holding certain positions.	pro	Mandatory state vaccines are decades-old with tonnes of data and research to back their safety and effectiveness up.	Parents can still claim exemptions for their children from mandated vaccinations for medical, religious, and philosophical reasons.	Mandatory vaccination falls under the "police power" of a state.	In some places in the US, healthcare workers are required(Vaccination coverage was highest (94.4%) among health care personnel working in settings where vaccination was required) to get vaccinated against the seasonal flu or to provide a reason for exemption from their physician.
mandatory state vaccines are decades-old with tonnes of data and research to back their safety and effectiveness up.	4_1.1.8.1.	Mandatory state vaccines are decades-old with tonnes of data and research to back their safety and effectiveness up.	con	Despite the data and research on the safety of vaccines themselves, this does not necessarily ensure the safety of a mandate. The current state of our society is very divided on vaccines, and a mandate could cause a significant enough portion of our population to react negatively. This would affect safety in ways not covered by your claim.
despite the data and research on the safety of vaccines themselves, this does not necessarily ensure the safety of a mandate. the current state of our society is very divided on vaccines, and a mandate could cause a significant enough portion of our population to react negatively. this would affect safety in ways not covered by your claim.	4_1.1.8.1.1.	Despite the data and research on the safety of vaccines themselves, this does not necessarily ensure the safety of a mandate. The current state of our society is very divided on vaccines, and a mandate could cause a significant enough portion of our population to react negatively. This would affect safety in ways not covered by your claim.	pro	
parents can still claim exemptions for their children from mandated vaccinations for medical, religious, and philosophical reasons.	4_1.1.8.2.	Parents can still claim exemptions for their children from mandated vaccinations for medical, religious, and philosophical reasons.	con	Exemptions could arguably still exist for the Covid-19 vaccines, making this point irrelevant to an overall mandate.
exemptions could arguably still exist for the covid-19 vaccines, making this point irrelevant to an overall mandate.	4_1.1.8.2.1.	Exemptions could arguably still exist for the Covid-19 vaccines, making this point irrelevant to an overall mandate.	pro	
mandatory vaccination falls under the "police power" of a state.	4_1.1.8.3.	Mandatory vaccination falls under the "police power" of a state.	pro	
in some places in the us, healthcare workers are required(vaccination coverage was highest (94.4%) among health care personnel working in settings where vaccination was required) to get vaccinated against the seasonal flu or to provide a reason for exemption from their physician.	4_1.1.8.4.	In some places in the US, healthcare workers are required(Vaccination coverage was highest (94.4%) among health care personnel working in settings where vaccination was required) to get vaccinated against the seasonal flu or to provide a reason for exemption from their physician.	pro	
mandatory vaccine policies have proved extremely helpful in the fight against other preventable illnesses.	4_1.2.	Mandatory vaccine policies have proved extremely helpful in the fight against other preventable illnesses.	pro	A study of European countries discovered, "Those \[countries\] where a vaccination is mandatory do not usually reach better coverage than neighbour or similar countries where there is no legal obligation."	Compulsory vaccination greatly reduces infection rates for diseases.	In the past, mandatory vaccinations have increased vaccine uptake. They are likely to be similarly effective in this case.	The state already makes certain vaccines a requirement for attending public schools or holding certain positions.
a study of european countries discovered, "those \[countries\] where a vaccination is mandatory do not usually reach better coverage than neighbour or similar countries where there is no legal obligation."	4_1.2.1.	A study of European countries discovered, "Those \[countries\] where a vaccination is mandatory do not usually reach better coverage than neighbour or similar countries where there is no legal obligation."	con	
compulsory vaccination greatly reduces infection rates for diseases.	4_1.2.2.	Compulsory vaccination greatly reduces infection rates for diseases.	pro	In the US, states with mandatory school immunization laws had a 40-51% lower rate of measles than states without mandatory immunization laws.	Even if not fully successful, vaccines will greatly reduce the number of people getting infected, the mortality rate and the burden on the public healthcare system.	A UK study showed that compulsory vaccination against measles raised the proportion of children protected against measles.
in the us, states with mandatory school immunization laws had a 40-51% lower rate of measles than states without mandatory immunization laws.	4_1.2.2.1.	In the US, states with mandatory school immunization laws had a 40-51% lower rate of measles than states without mandatory immunization laws.	pro	
even if not fully successful, vaccines will greatly reduce the number of people getting infected, the mortality rate and the burden on the public healthcare system.	4_1.2.2.2.	Even if not fully successful, vaccines will greatly reduce the number of people getting infected, the mortality rate and the burden on the public healthcare system.	pro	
a uk study showed that compulsory vaccination against measles raised the proportion of children protected against measles.	4_1.2.2.3.	A UK study showed that compulsory vaccination against measles raised the proportion of children protected against measles.	pro	
in the past, mandatory vaccinations have increased vaccine uptake. they are likely to be similarly effective in this case.	4_1.2.3.	In the past, mandatory vaccinations have increased vaccine uptake. They are likely to be similarly effective in this case.	pro	
a mandatory vaccine policy would vastly increase already present inequalities in medical treatment.	4_1.3.	A mandatory vaccine policy would vastly increase already present inequalities in medical treatment.	con	A mandatory vaccine policy would greatly increase competition between countries for supply, increasing the already inequitable distribution of vaccines throughout the world.	Differences over how to distribute the vaccine in a mandatory system will lead to some people being prioritized over others.	Inequality in access to healthcare is an existing problem for low-income BIPOC communities. Vaccinations would not impact this issue one way or another.	Marginalized populations are at higher risk of infection, and have suffered more from the economic impacts of COVID-19. Mandatory vaccination will alleviate dual harms to these communities.
a mandatory vaccine policy would greatly increase competition between countries for supply, increasing the already inequitable distribution of vaccines throughout the world.	4_1.3.1.	A mandatory vaccine policy would greatly increase competition between countries for supply, increasing the already inequitable distribution of vaccines throughout the world.	con	Mandatory vaccination could result in rich countries hoarding vaccines for their population. This could make vaccines inaccessible or unaffordable for poorer countries.	Some countries in Europe, such as France and Germany, have promised a fair and equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccination amongst all countries in the world.	It will be easier for rich countries to access, produce and distribute COVID-19 vaccines. These countries will therefore recover faster from the pandemic. This will increase existing inequality in public health and economy between rich and poor countries.	Rich countries have a moral obligation to help poorer countries in accessing vaccines.
mandatory vaccination could result in rich countries hoarding vaccines for their population. this could make vaccines inaccessible or unaffordable for poorer countries.	4_1.3.1.1.	Mandatory vaccination could result in rich countries hoarding vaccines for their population. This could make vaccines inaccessible or unaffordable for poorer countries.	con	The price of individual doses of the COVID-19 vaccine is based on deals worked out between pharmaceutical companies and individual companies, leading to a wide disparity in prices between countries.	While the prices of vaccines are likely to be low in the beginning, they will increase as time passes. This will leave such countries worse off in the long run.
the price of individual doses of the covid-19 vaccine is based on deals worked out between pharmaceutical companies and individual companies, leading to a wide disparity in prices between countries.	4_1.3.1.1.1.	The price of individual doses of the COVID-19 vaccine is based on deals worked out between pharmaceutical companies and individual companies, leading to a wide disparity in prices between countries.	con	Moderna, a pharmaceutical company with a COVID-19 vaccine candidate, has already secured deals with several countries for a dose price of $32-$37.	Many pharmaceutical companies have stated that they intend to make a profit off the COVID-19 vaccine stating, "We will not sell it at cost."	The World Bank and Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations have created a global fund to cover vaccine development until vaccines can be licensed or used under emergency use provisions.	Financing mechanisms such as those developed for AIDS and malaria drugs could be used to reduce the cost of the vaccine for certain countries.
moderna, a pharmaceutical company with a covid-19 vaccine candidate, has already secured deals with several countries for a dose price of $32-$37.	4_1.3.1.1.1.1.	Moderna, a pharmaceutical company with a COVID-19 vaccine candidate, has already secured deals with several countries for a dose price of $32-$37.	con	
many pharmaceutical companies have stated that they intend to make a profit off the covid-19 vaccine stating, "we will not sell it at cost."	4_1.3.1.1.1.2.	Many pharmaceutical companies have stated that they intend to make a profit off the COVID-19 vaccine stating, "We will not sell it at cost."	con	
the world bank and coalition for epidemic preparedness innovations have created a global fund to cover vaccine development until vaccines can be licensed or used under emergency use provisions.	4_1.3.1.1.1.3.	The World Bank and Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations have created a global fund to cover vaccine development until vaccines can be licensed or used under emergency use provisions.	pro	
financing mechanisms such as those developed for aids and malaria drugs could be used to reduce the cost of the vaccine for certain countries.	4_1.3.1.1.1.4.	Financing mechanisms such as those developed for AIDS and malaria drugs could be used to reduce the cost of the vaccine for certain countries.	pro	
while the prices of vaccines are likely to be low in the beginning, they will increase as time passes. this will leave such countries worse off in the long run.	4_1.3.1.1.2.	While the prices of vaccines are likely to be low in the beginning, they will increase as time passes. This will leave such countries worse off in the long run.	con	Vaccine-makers have indicated that, while they are willing to sell at lower prices during the pandemic, beyond it, their pricing will be in line "with other innovative commercial vaccines."	Given that supply will increase as more vaccines are approved for use, and demand will decrease as more people are vaccinated, the laws of supply and demand dictate that prices will reduce as time passes.
vaccine-makers have indicated that, while they are willing to sell at lower prices during the pandemic, beyond it, their pricing will be in line "with other innovative commercial vaccines."	4_1.3.1.1.2.1.	Vaccine-makers have indicated that, while they are willing to sell at lower prices during the pandemic, beyond it, their pricing will be in line "with other innovative commercial vaccines."	con	
given that supply will increase as more vaccines are approved for use, and demand will decrease as more people are vaccinated, the laws of supply and demand dictate that prices will reduce as time passes.	4_1.3.1.1.2.2.	Given that supply will increase as more vaccines are approved for use, and demand will decrease as more people are vaccinated, the laws of supply and demand dictate that prices will reduce as time passes.	pro	
some countries in europe, such as france and germany, have promised a fair and equitable distribution of covid-19 vaccination amongst all countries in the world.	4_1.3.1.2.	Some countries in Europe, such as France and Germany, have promised a fair and equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccination amongst all countries in the world.	pro	
it will be easier for rich countries to access, produce and distribute covid-19 vaccines. these countries will therefore recover faster from the pandemic. this will increase existing inequality in public health and economy between rich and poor countries.	4_1.3.1.3.	It will be easier for rich countries to access, produce and distribute COVID-19 vaccines. These countries will therefore recover faster from the pandemic. This will increase existing inequality in public health and economy between rich and poor countries.	con	Data on vaccine deals show that the vast majority of vaccines bought so far are by high-income countries.	Many developing countries cannot afford to buy vaccines without assistance from rich countries.	COVAX, a program co-led by the World Health Organisation, (WHO) is pooling donations from rich developed countries and philanthropists to make vaccines accessible to poor countries.	Wealthy countries have been stockpiling COVID-19 vaccines, so that little to none are left behind for poorer nations.
data on vaccine deals show that the vast majority of vaccines bought so far are by high-income countries.	4_1.3.1.3.1.	Data on vaccine deals show that the vast majority of vaccines bought so far are by high-income countries.	con	
many developing countries cannot afford to buy vaccines without assistance from rich countries.	4_1.3.1.3.2.	Many developing countries cannot afford to buy vaccines without assistance from rich countries.	con	
covax, a program co-led by the world health organisation, (who) is pooling donations from rich developed countries and philanthropists to make vaccines accessible to poor countries.	4_1.3.1.3.3.	COVAX, a program co-led by the World Health Organisation, (WHO) is pooling donations from rich developed countries and philanthropists to make vaccines accessible to poor countries.	pro	COVAX aims to prevent the same sweep up of vaccine doses by high-income countries that occurred during the 2009 swine flu.	The COVAX programme has a high risk of failure.
covax aims to prevent the same sweep up of vaccine doses by high-income countries that occurred during the 2009 swine flu.	4_1.3.1.3.3.1.	COVAX aims to prevent the same sweep up of vaccine doses by high-income countries that occurred during the 2009 swine flu.	pro	
the covax programme has a high risk of failure.	4_1.3.1.3.3.2.	The COVAX programme has a high risk of failure.	con	
wealthy countries have been stockpiling covid-19 vaccines, so that little to none are left behind for poorer nations.	4_1.3.1.3.4.	Wealthy countries have been stockpiling COVID-19 vaccines, so that little to none are left behind for poorer nations.	con	Even before a single vaccine had been proven viable, deals worth millions, if not billions, of euros had already been made by certain countries to ensure they had first access to the vaccine.	In August 2020, rich countries had already pre-ordered more than two billion doses of vaccines for their population.	Some vaccine producers, like those in China, are focusing on providing vaccines to the developing world.
even before a single vaccine had been proven viable, deals worth millions, if not billions, of euros had already been made by certain countries to ensure they had first access to the vaccine.	4_1.3.1.3.4.1.	Even before a single vaccine had been proven viable, deals worth millions, if not billions, of euros had already been made by certain countries to ensure they had first access to the vaccine.	con	By the end of July 2020, the U.K. had secured deals for millions of doses with multiple possible vaccine candidates.
by the end of july 2020, the u.k. had secured deals for millions of doses with multiple possible vaccine candidates.	4_1.3.1.3.4.1.1.	By the end of July 2020, the U.K. had secured deals for millions of doses with multiple possible vaccine candidates.	con	
in august 2020, rich countries had already pre-ordered more than two billion doses of vaccines for their population.	4_1.3.1.3.4.2.	In August 2020, rich countries had already pre-ordered more than two billion doses of vaccines for their population.	con	
some vaccine producers, like those in china, are focusing on providing vaccines to the developing world.	4_1.3.1.3.4.3.	Some vaccine producers, like those in China, are focusing on providing vaccines to the developing world.	pro	
rich countries have a moral obligation to help poorer countries in accessing vaccines.	4_1.3.1.4.	Rich countries have a moral obligation to help poorer countries in accessing vaccines.	con	It is the government's responsibility of a poor country to help its citizens not the job of rich countries.	Just because a country is rich, doesn't necessarily mean said country is morally obligated to give handouts to poorer countries.
it is the government's responsibility of a poor country to help its citizens not the job of rich countries.	4_1.3.1.4.1.	It is the government's responsibility of a poor country to help its citizens not the job of rich countries.	pro	
just because a country is rich, doesn't necessarily mean said country is morally obligated to give handouts to poorer countries.	4_1.3.1.4.2.	Just because a country is rich, doesn't necessarily mean said country is morally obligated to give handouts to poorer countries.	pro	Suggesting that a rich country has a moral obligation to help a poor country is like suggesting that a billionaire is morally obligated to help out those in debt.
suggesting that a rich country has a moral obligation to help a poor country is like suggesting that a billionaire is morally obligated to help out those in debt.	4_1.3.1.4.2.1.	Suggesting that a rich country has a moral obligation to help a poor country is like suggesting that a billionaire is morally obligated to help out those in debt.	pro	Some people argue that billionaires do have a moral obligation to help the rest of society.
some people argue that billionaires do have a moral obligation to help the rest of society.	4_1.3.1.4.2.1.1.	Some people argue that billionaires do have a moral obligation to help the rest of society.	con	
differences over how to distribute the vaccine in a mandatory system will lead to some people being prioritized over others.	4_1.3.2.	Differences over how to distribute the vaccine in a mandatory system will lead to some people being prioritized over others.	con	Healthcare professionals need to be safe and healthy to perform their duties, which in turn is important in order to keep the population healthy. This is why they should be vaccinated first.	COVID-19 disproportionately affects communities of color in the US. While a distribution that divides doses equally based on population between states may be "fair", it may unequally reach those who most need it.	It is understood that there will initially be a limited supply of COVID-19 vaccine doses, requiring countries to choose who takes priority in receiving them.	Certain groups are already at higher risk for contracting COVID-19. Not prioritizing these groups may lead to unnecessary deaths.	Hospitals are already overwhelmed with COVID-19 patients. Prioritizing those most likely to be hospitalized due to comorbidities will alleviate strain and increase resources for those already infected.
healthcare professionals need to be safe and healthy to perform their duties, which in turn is important in order to keep the population healthy. this is why they should be vaccinated first.	4_1.3.2.1.	Healthcare professionals need to be safe and healthy to perform their duties, which in turn is important in order to keep the population healthy. This is why they should be vaccinated first.	pro	Instead of prioritizing healthcare workers, it is better to vaccinate people living in worst-affected areas in order to prevent the outbreak from spreading. That is a better way to reduce the overall burden on our healthcare systems.
instead of prioritizing healthcare workers, it is better to vaccinate people living in worst-affected areas in order to prevent the outbreak from spreading. that is a better way to reduce the overall burden on our healthcare systems.	4_1.3.2.1.1.	Instead of prioritizing healthcare workers, it is better to vaccinate people living in worst-affected areas in order to prevent the outbreak from spreading. That is a better way to reduce the overall burden on our healthcare systems.	con	
covid-19 disproportionately affects communities of color in the us. while a distribution that divides doses equally based on population between states may be "fair", it may unequally reach those who most need it.	4_1.3.2.2.	COVID-19 disproportionately affects communities of color in the US. While a distribution that divides doses equally based on population between states may be "fair", it may unequally reach those who most need it.	con	
it is understood that there will initially be a limited supply of covid-19 vaccine doses, requiring countries to choose who takes priority in receiving them.	4_1.3.2.3.	It is understood that there will initially be a limited supply of COVID-19 vaccine doses, requiring countries to choose who takes priority in receiving them.	con	For the H1N1 virus, the government designated a priority group to receive treatment consisting of, "pregnant women, caregivers for infants, healthcare and emergency services personnel, children and youths up to 24 years old, and people ages 25 to 64 who have medical conditions that put them at increased risk for severe outcomes."	Designating priority status to certain people leaves little room for flexibility and can result in arguably unfair outcomes for those who try to do their best in certain difficult situations.
for the h1n1 virus, the government designated a priority group to receive treatment consisting of, "pregnant women, caregivers for infants, healthcare and emergency services personnel, children and youths up to 24 years old, and people ages 25 to 64 who have medical conditions that put them at increased risk for severe outcomes."	4_1.3.2.3.1.	For the H1N1 virus, the government designated a priority group to receive treatment consisting of, "pregnant women, caregivers for infants, healthcare and emergency services personnel, children and youths up to 24 years old, and people ages 25 to 64 who have medical conditions that put them at increased risk for severe outcomes."	con	
designating priority status to certain people leaves little room for flexibility and can result in arguably unfair outcomes for those who try to do their best in certain difficult situations.	4_1.3.2.3.2.	Designating priority status to certain people leaves little room for flexibility and can result in arguably unfair outcomes for those who try to do their best in certain difficult situations.	con	
certain groups are already at higher risk for contracting covid-19. not prioritizing these groups may lead to unnecessary deaths.	4_1.3.2.4.	Certain groups are already at higher risk for contracting COVID-19. Not prioritizing these groups may lead to unnecessary deaths.	pro	
hospitals are already overwhelmed with covid-19 patients. prioritizing those most likely to be hospitalized due to comorbidities will alleviate strain and increase resources for those already infected.	4_1.3.2.5.	Hospitals are already overwhelmed with COVID-19 patients. Prioritizing those most likely to be hospitalized due to comorbidities will alleviate strain and increase resources for those already infected.	pro	
inequality in access to healthcare is an existing problem for low-income bipoc communities. vaccinations would not impact this issue one way or another.	4_1.3.3.	Inequality in access to healthcare is an existing problem for low-income BIPOC communities. Vaccinations would not impact this issue one way or another.	pro	
marginalized populations are at higher risk of infection, and have suffered more from the economic impacts of covid-19. mandatory vaccination will alleviate dual harms to these communities.	4_1.3.4.	Marginalized populations are at higher risk of infection, and have suffered more from the economic impacts of COVID-19. Mandatory vaccination will alleviate dual harms to these communities.	pro	Marginalized populations are more likely to be frontline workers who cannot avoid contracting COVID-19 through social distancing or other measures. Mandatory vaccination would protect them.
marginalized populations are more likely to be frontline workers who cannot avoid contracting covid-19 through social distancing or other measures. mandatory vaccination would protect them.	4_1.3.4.1.	Marginalized populations are more likely to be frontline workers who cannot avoid contracting COVID-19 through social distancing or other measures. Mandatory vaccination would protect them.	pro	
providing vaccinations to an entire population requires huge amounts of resources which can otherwise be used towards addressing more urgent public health issues.	4_1.4.	Providing vaccinations to an entire population requires huge amounts of resources which can otherwise be used towards addressing more urgent public health issues.	con	In low-income countries, most people will not receive a vaccination without global assistance. It is unfair for taxpayers in rich countries to have to fund vaccinations for people in other countries.	Instead of spending resources on COVID-19, which predominantly impacts older people, public health resources should be spent on children as they are the future of a country.	COVID-19 is the most urgent public health issue at the moment, and should therefore have priority.	While there are economic considerations at play, none are so insurmountable that they should preclude mandatory vaccination.	The surge in COVID-19 cases has overwhelmed hospital systems, causing ripple effects that impact other public health issues.	Governments have given billions of taxpayers dollars to different drug companies to make the COVID-19 vaccine, much of which could be wasted if the vaccine doesn't work.
in low-income countries, most people will not receive a vaccination without global assistance. it is unfair for taxpayers in rich countries to have to fund vaccinations for people in other countries.	4_1.4.1.	In low-income countries, most people will not receive a vaccination without global assistance. It is unfair for taxpayers in rich countries to have to fund vaccinations for people in other countries.	con	In an interconnected world like ours, improving the global economy that is currently adversely impacted by the virus is good for the economic health of every country.	Without vaccines, countries would have to mandate lockdowns, which have a devastating impact on the economies of developing nations.
in an interconnected world like ours, improving the global economy that is currently adversely impacted by the virus is good for the economic health of every country.	4_1.4.1.1.	In an interconnected world like ours, improving the global economy that is currently adversely impacted by the virus is good for the economic health of every country.	pro	A study in January 2021 showed that failure to provide the COVID-19 vaccine in poor nations will result in significant economic costs for wealthy countries.
a study in january 2021 showed that failure to provide the covid-19 vaccine in poor nations will result in significant economic costs for wealthy countries.	4_1.4.1.1.1.	A study in January 2021 showed that failure to provide the COVID-19 vaccine in poor nations will result in significant economic costs for wealthy countries.	pro	
without vaccines, countries would have to mandate lockdowns, which have a devastating impact on the economies of developing nations.	4_1.4.1.2.	Without vaccines, countries would have to mandate lockdowns, which have a devastating impact on the economies of developing nations.	pro	In low-income countries, lockdowns lead to reduced access to healthcare.
in low-income countries, lockdowns lead to reduced access to healthcare.	4_1.4.1.2.1.	In low-income countries, lockdowns lead to reduced access to healthcare.	pro	
instead of spending resources on covid-19, which predominantly impacts older people, public health resources should be spent on children as they are the future of a country.	4_1.4.2.	Instead of spending resources on COVID-19, which predominantly impacts older people, public health resources should be spent on children as they are the future of a country.	con	Without vaccines, schools will not be able to fully re-open.	Investing in child health produces greater aggregate outcomes. (p. 777	More children die of diseases other than COVID-19. We should therefore spend more resources in treating and preventing these diseases than on COVID-19.	Children might be more vulnerable to the virus than it was initially thought as they can contract and be harmed by the virus.
without vaccines, schools will not be able to fully re-open.	4_1.4.2.1.	Without vaccines, schools will not be able to fully re-open.	pro	COVID-19 has similar hospitalization and death rates as the flu for unvaccinated children, and the flu does not prevent schools from operating.	Schools are vital to economic recovery because most parents will not be able to return to work without the childcare they offer.	Opening schools is vital to long-term economic health, because students, who will comprise the future workforce, will miss out on key learning otherwise (section 4).	Adults make up most known cases of COVID-19 to date. There are ways to open schools for children without mandatory vaccination.	It is currently unknown if the COVID-19 vaccine would be safe for children.
covid-19 has similar hospitalization and death rates as the flu for unvaccinated children, and the flu does not prevent schools from operating.	4_1.4.2.1.1.	COVID-19 has similar hospitalization and death rates as the flu for unvaccinated children, and the flu does not prevent schools from operating.	con	There were 39,205 hospitalizations and 372 deaths for children aged 0–17 that were flu-related in the 2018–2019 season in the US (12 month duration), and there have been about 36,000 hospitalizations and 605 (186+419) deaths that were COVID-19 related in children aged 0–18 in the US between Jan. 14, 2020 and of Oct. 9, 2021 (21 month duration).	The hospitalization and death rate from COVID-19 is markedly higher in adults, who children can infect. It is therefore important to reduce the chances of children contracting COVID-19.
there were 39,205 hospitalizations and 372 deaths for children aged 0–17 that were flu-related in the 2018–2019 season in the us (12 month duration), and there have been about 36,000 hospitalizations and 605 (186+419) deaths that were covid-19 related in children aged 0–18 in the us between jan. 14, 2020 and of oct. 9, 2021 (21 month duration).	4_1.4.2.1.1.1.	There were 39,205 hospitalizations and 372 deaths for children aged 0–17 that were flu-related in the 2018–2019 season in the US (12 month duration), and there have been about 36,000 hospitalizations and 605 (186+419) deaths that were COVID-19 related in children aged 0–18 in the US between Jan. 14, 2020 and of Oct. 9, 2021 (21 month duration).	con	The cumulative hospitalization rate from COVID-19 for children aged 0–18 was 49.7 per 100,000 as of August 14, 2021.	The US population 18 and under is 72 million	49.7 * 72,000,000 ≈ 36,000
the cumulative hospitalization rate from covid-19 for children aged 0–18 was 49.7 per 100,000 as of august 14, 2021.	4_1.4.2.1.1.1.1.	The cumulative hospitalization rate from COVID-19 for children aged 0–18 was 49.7 per 100,000 as of August 14, 2021.	con	
the us population 18 and under is 72 million	4_1.4.2.1.1.1.2.	The US population 18 and under is 72 million	con	
49.7 * 72,000,000 ≈ 36,000	4_1.4.2.1.1.1.3.	49.7 * 72,000,000 ≈ 36,000	con	
the hospitalization and death rate from covid-19 is markedly higher in adults, who children can infect. it is therefore important to reduce the chances of children contracting covid-19.	4_1.4.2.1.1.2.	The hospitalization and death rate from COVID-19 is markedly higher in adults, who children can infect. It is therefore important to reduce the chances of children contracting COVID-19.	pro	There is no need to mandate child vaccination, since adults are protected by getting their own vaccine.	Adults are protected by getting their own vaccine because vaccines are 95–100% effective in preventing serious COVID-19 infection in adults.
there is no need to mandate child vaccination, since adults are protected by getting their own vaccine.	4_1.4.2.1.1.2.1.	There is no need to mandate child vaccination, since adults are protected by getting their own vaccine.	con	Vaccination only reduces the likelihood of delta variant transmission by 50-66% (p. 28, p. 21).	Vaccines are 95–100% effective in preventing serious COVID-19 infection in adults.
vaccination only reduces the likelihood of delta variant transmission by 50-66% (p. 28, p. 21).	4_1.4.2.1.1.2.1.1.	Vaccination only reduces the likelihood of delta variant transmission by 50-66% (p. 28, p. 21).	con	
vaccines are 95–100% effective in preventing serious covid-19 infection in adults.	4_1.4.2.1.1.2.1.2.	Vaccines are 95–100% effective in preventing serious COVID-19 infection in adults.	con	
adults are protected by getting their own vaccine because vaccines are 95–100% effective in preventing serious covid-19 infection in adults.	4_1.4.2.1.1.2.2.	Adults are protected by getting their own vaccine because vaccines are 95–100% effective in preventing serious COVID-19 infection in adults.	con	
schools are vital to economic recovery because most parents will not be able to return to work without the childcare they offer.	4_1.4.2.1.2.	Schools are vital to economic recovery because most parents will not be able to return to work without the childcare they offer.	pro	
opening schools is vital to long-term economic health, because students, who will comprise the future workforce, will miss out on key learning otherwise (section 4).	4_1.4.2.1.3.	Opening schools is vital to long-term economic health, because students, who will comprise the future workforce, will miss out on key learning otherwise (section 4).	pro	Social distancing measures which require remote learning disproportionately impact already marginalized children.
social distancing measures which require remote learning disproportionately impact already marginalized children.	4_1.4.2.1.3.1.	Social distancing measures which require remote learning disproportionately impact already marginalized children.	pro	
adults make up most known cases of covid-19 to date. there are ways to open schools for children without mandatory vaccination.	4_1.4.2.1.4.	Adults make up most known cases of COVID-19 to date. There are ways to open schools for children without mandatory vaccination.	con	Children would inherently be coming into contact with the adults in their lives, and since children can spread the virus, risks remain.
children would inherently be coming into contact with the adults in their lives, and since children can spread the virus, risks remain.	4_1.4.2.1.4.1.	Children would inherently be coming into contact with the adults in their lives, and since children can spread the virus, risks remain.	pro	
it is currently unknown if the covid-19 vaccine would be safe for children.	4_1.4.2.1.5.	It is currently unknown if the COVID-19 vaccine would be safe for children.	con	By December 2020, the Pfizer vaccine had only been authorized for individuals that were 16 years of age or older.	As of December 2020, the Moderna vaccine was only been authorized for individuals who are 18 years of age or older.	In December 2020, trials to test if the vaccines are safe for children began.	A vaccine would not necessarily be needed for children, once the adult population, who are more at risk of suffering from COVID-19, are vaccinated
by december 2020, the pfizer vaccine had only been authorized for individuals that were 16 years of age or older.	4_1.4.2.1.5.1.	By December 2020, the Pfizer vaccine had only been authorized for individuals that were 16 years of age or older.	con	
as of december 2020, the moderna vaccine was only been authorized for individuals who are 18 years of age or older.	4_1.4.2.1.5.2.	As of December 2020, the Moderna vaccine was only been authorized for individuals who are 18 years of age or older.	con	
in december 2020, trials to test if the vaccines are safe for children began.	4_1.4.2.1.5.3.	In December 2020, trials to test if the vaccines are safe for children began.	pro	It is believed that these trials will not be concluded until 2022, due to barriers such as fewer volunteers, a higher threshold for approval, and the need to attune the dosage so that it is more appropriate for children.
it is believed that these trials will not be concluded until 2022, due to barriers such as fewer volunteers, a higher threshold for approval, and the need to attune the dosage so that it is more appropriate for children.	4_1.4.2.1.5.3.1.	It is believed that these trials will not be concluded until 2022, due to barriers such as fewer volunteers, a higher threshold for approval, and the need to attune the dosage so that it is more appropriate for children.	con	
a vaccine would not necessarily be needed for children, once the adult population, who are more at risk of suffering from covid-19, are vaccinated	4_1.4.2.1.5.4.	A vaccine would not necessarily be needed for children, once the adult population, who are more at risk of suffering from COVID-19, are vaccinated	pro	
investing in child health produces greater aggregate outcomes. (p. 777	4_1.4.2.2.	Investing in child health produces greater aggregate outcomes. (p. 777	con	
more children die of diseases other than covid-19. we should therefore spend more resources in treating and preventing these diseases than on covid-19.	4_1.4.2.3.	More children die of diseases other than COVID-19. We should therefore spend more resources in treating and preventing these diseases than on COVID-19.	con	Shifting to prioritize the production COVID-19 vaccinations will result in shortages of other vaccines like those for preventable childhood diseases like measles and mumps.
shifting to prioritize the production covid-19 vaccinations will result in shortages of other vaccines like those for preventable childhood diseases like measles and mumps.	4_1.4.2.3.1.	Shifting to prioritize the production COVID-19 vaccinations will result in shortages of other vaccines like those for preventable childhood diseases like measles and mumps.	con	
children might be more vulnerable to the virus than it was initially thought as they can contract and be harmed by the virus.	4_1.4.2.4.	Children might be more vulnerable to the virus than it was initially thought as they can contract and be harmed by the virus.	pro	Pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, a condition that impacts children, is likely to be associated with COVID-19 infection.	In the U.S. there was a 40% increase in COVID-19 cases among children in the 2 last weeks of July 2020, compared to the total number of cases before those 2 weeks.	A study published in August 2020 that analyzed infections in a children's summer camp, found that contagion rates were up to six times lower than in adults.	Children are more susceptible to the new COVID-19 variant, B117.
pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, a condition that impacts children, is likely to be associated with covid-19 infection.	4_1.4.2.4.1.	Pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, a condition that impacts children, is likely to be associated with COVID-19 infection.	pro	Per week, up to 100 children with PIMS were being hospitalized in the UK.
per week, up to 100 children with pims were being hospitalized in the uk.	4_1.4.2.4.1.1.	Per week, up to 100 children with PIMS were being hospitalized in the UK.	pro	
in the u.s. there was a 40% increase in covid-19 cases among children in the 2 last weeks of july 2020, compared to the total number of cases before those 2 weeks.	4_1.4.2.4.2.	In the U.S. there was a 40% increase in COVID-19 cases among children in the 2 last weeks of July 2020, compared to the total number of cases before those 2 weeks.	pro	
a study published in august 2020 that analyzed infections in a children's summer camp, found that contagion rates were up to six times lower than in adults.	4_1.4.2.4.3.	A study published in August 2020 that analyzed infections in a children's summer camp, found that contagion rates were up to six times lower than in adults.	con	
children are more susceptible to the new covid-19 variant, b117.	4_1.4.2.4.4.	Children are more susceptible to the new COVID-19 variant, B117.	pro	
covid-19 is the most urgent public health issue at the moment, and should therefore have priority.	4_1.4.3.	COVID-19 is the most urgent public health issue at the moment, and should therefore have priority.	pro	The long-term side effects of COVID-19 are so grave, and so much worse than any other public health issues, that mandatory vaccination is a necessity.	In the US, more people are dying from COVID-19 than from diseases such as cancer or heart conditions. It is therefore justified to utilize resources to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
the long-term side effects of covid-19 are so grave, and so much worse than any other public health issues, that mandatory vaccination is a necessity.	4_1.4.3.1.	The long-term side effects of COVID-19 are so grave, and so much worse than any other public health issues, that mandatory vaccination is a necessity.	pro	
in the us, more people are dying from covid-19 than from diseases such as cancer or heart conditions. it is therefore justified to utilize resources to prevent the spread of covid-19.	4_1.4.3.2.	In the US, more people are dying from COVID-19 than from diseases such as cancer or heart conditions. It is therefore justified to utilize resources to prevent the spread of COVID-19.	pro	
while there are economic considerations at play, none are so insurmountable that they should preclude mandatory vaccination.	4_1.4.4.	While there are economic considerations at play, none are so insurmountable that they should preclude mandatory vaccination.	pro	Investing in COVID-19 vaccination costs money. But this investment has high returns because if fewer people fell sick, less public health and economic resources are spent long term.	The total cost required for making and distributing COVID-19 vaccines for the poorest half of the world are the same as the total profits made by world's top ten pharmaceutical companies in four months. Through increased taxation, governments can use this money for public good.	Spending on curbing COVID-19 infections has already seen unprecedented levels of financial borrowing.
investing in covid-19 vaccination costs money. but this investment has high returns because if fewer people fell sick, less public health and economic resources are spent long term.	4_1.4.4.1.	Investing in COVID-19 vaccination costs money. But this investment has high returns because if fewer people fell sick, less public health and economic resources are spent long term.	pro	Even with economic considerations, vaccination is a preferable way to stop the spread of COVID-19 because it would lead to faster economic recovery.	An increase in the number of COVID-19 infections results in reduced resources due to the economic loss it causes.
even with economic considerations, vaccination is a preferable way to stop the spread of covid-19 because it would lead to faster economic recovery.	4_1.4.4.1.1.	Even with economic considerations, vaccination is a preferable way to stop the spread of COVID-19 because it would lead to faster economic recovery.	pro	
an increase in the number of covid-19 infections results in reduced resources due to the economic loss it causes.	4_1.4.4.1.2.	An increase in the number of COVID-19 infections results in reduced resources due to the economic loss it causes.	pro	
the total cost required for making and distributing covid-19 vaccines for the poorest half of the world are the same as the total profits made by world's top ten pharmaceutical companies in four months. through increased taxation, governments can use this money for public good.	4_1.4.4.2.	The total cost required for making and distributing COVID-19 vaccines for the poorest half of the world are the same as the total profits made by world's top ten pharmaceutical companies in four months. Through increased taxation, governments can use this money for public good.	pro	Pharmaceutical companies are at the forefront of innovation concerning the development of COVID-19 vaccination. Taxing them heavily can dampen the spirit of competitiveness and slow this development.	Governments have invested massively in pharmaceutical companies developing COVID-19 vaccines. It is therefore legitimate for the government to impose heavy taxes which can be used to fund the distribution of vaccines.
pharmaceutical companies are at the forefront of innovation concerning the development of covid-19 vaccination. taxing them heavily can dampen the spirit of competitiveness and slow this development.	4_1.4.4.2.1.	Pharmaceutical companies are at the forefront of innovation concerning the development of COVID-19 vaccination. Taxing them heavily can dampen the spirit of competitiveness and slow this development.	con	
governments have invested massively in pharmaceutical companies developing covid-19 vaccines. it is therefore legitimate for the government to impose heavy taxes which can be used to fund the distribution of vaccines.	4_1.4.4.2.2.	Governments have invested massively in pharmaceutical companies developing COVID-19 vaccines. It is therefore legitimate for the government to impose heavy taxes which can be used to fund the distribution of vaccines.	pro	
spending on curbing covid-19 infections has already seen unprecedented levels of financial borrowing.	4_1.4.4.3.	Spending on curbing COVID-19 infections has already seen unprecedented levels of financial borrowing.	con	Governments can redirect money from non-urgent projects, such as military spending, to fund vaccination.	Poorer countries are not able to engage in fiscal borrowing without long-term damage to their economies. (pg. 2)	Vaccines are a way to prevent fiscal borrowing in the future by avoiding more lockdowns that impact businesses.	Government spending during the pandemic is a way to reduce long-term negative impacts on the economy.
governments can redirect money from non-urgent projects, such as military spending, to fund vaccination.	4_1.4.4.3.1.	Governments can redirect money from non-urgent projects, such as military spending, to fund vaccination.	pro	
poorer countries are not able to engage in fiscal borrowing without long-term damage to their economies. (pg. 2)	4_1.4.4.3.2.	Poorer countries are not able to engage in fiscal borrowing without long-term damage to their economies. (pg. 2)	con	
vaccines are a way to prevent fiscal borrowing in the future by avoiding more lockdowns that impact businesses.	4_1.4.4.3.3.	Vaccines are a way to prevent fiscal borrowing in the future by avoiding more lockdowns that impact businesses.	pro	In the UK, lockdowns resulted in a 22% reduction in GDP during the second quarter of 2020 when compared to the final quarter of 2019.	Apart from a decrease in economic activity, lockdowns require additional spending to support people who are unemployed due to business closures.
in the uk, lockdowns resulted in a 22% reduction in gdp during the second quarter of 2020 when compared to the final quarter of 2019.	4_1.4.4.3.3.1.	In the UK, lockdowns resulted in a 22% reduction in GDP during the second quarter of 2020 when compared to the final quarter of 2019.	pro	
apart from a decrease in economic activity, lockdowns require additional spending to support people who are unemployed due to business closures.	4_1.4.4.3.3.2.	Apart from a decrease in economic activity, lockdowns require additional spending to support people who are unemployed due to business closures.	pro	
government spending during the pandemic is a way to reduce long-term negative impacts on the economy.	4_1.4.4.3.4.	Government spending during the pandemic is a way to reduce long-term negative impacts on the economy.	pro	A report in September 2020 by UNCTAD suggested that increased fiscal spending is the only way to build resilient economic recovery from COVID-19.
a report in september 2020 by unctad suggested that increased fiscal spending is the only way to build resilient economic recovery from covid-19.	4_1.4.4.3.4.1.	A report in September 2020 by UNCTAD suggested that increased fiscal spending is the only way to build resilient economic recovery from COVID-19.	pro	
the surge in covid-19 cases has overwhelmed hospital systems, causing ripple effects that impact other public health issues.	4_1.4.5.	The surge in COVID-19 cases has overwhelmed hospital systems, causing ripple effects that impact other public health issues.	pro	Public health systems are overwhelmed because they are underfunded. The end of the COVID-19 pandemic should not excuse governments from increasing funding and support towards public healthcare.	In January 2021, hospitals in the US continued to be overwhelmed and strained due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
public health systems are overwhelmed because they are underfunded. the end of the covid-19 pandemic should not excuse governments from increasing funding and support towards public healthcare.	4_1.4.5.1.	Public health systems are overwhelmed because they are underfunded. The end of the COVID-19 pandemic should not excuse governments from increasing funding and support towards public healthcare.	con	
in january 2021, hospitals in the us continued to be overwhelmed and strained due to the covid-19 pandemic.	4_1.4.5.2.	In January 2021, hospitals in the US continued to be overwhelmed and strained due to the COVID-19 pandemic.	pro	
governments have given billions of taxpayers dollars to different drug companies to make the covid-19 vaccine, much of which could be wasted if the vaccine doesn't work.	4_1.4.6.	Governments have given billions of taxpayers dollars to different drug companies to make the COVID-19 vaccine, much of which could be wasted if the vaccine doesn't work.	con	Investment in vaccine development is not wasted because it has already led to medical innovation that will be useful in treating other conditions.	Developing a vaccine involves high costs. Without government investment, private companies are not able to undertake such an endeavour.	The US alone contributed $12.4 billion to Operation Warp Speed.	Trying to develop a vaccine that would increase human immunity to one of the most devastating pandemics in world history should not be considered wasteful.	Many effective vaccines have been successfully produced.	The UK government has spent nearly £12bn on the COVID-19 vaccine.
investment in vaccine development is not wasted because it has already led to medical innovation that will be useful in treating other conditions.	4_1.4.6.1.	Investment in vaccine development is not wasted because it has already led to medical innovation that will be useful in treating other conditions.	pro	
developing a vaccine involves high costs. without government investment, private companies are not able to undertake such an endeavour.	4_1.4.6.2.	Developing a vaccine involves high costs. Without government investment, private companies are not able to undertake such an endeavour.	pro	Despite government investment, vaccines developed by private companies are expensive to procure.
despite government investment, vaccines developed by private companies are expensive to procure.	4_1.4.6.2.1.	Despite government investment, vaccines developed by private companies are expensive to procure.	con	
the us alone contributed $12.4 billion to operation warp speed.	4_1.4.6.3.	The US alone contributed $12.4 billion to Operation Warp Speed.	con	
trying to develop a vaccine that would increase human immunity to one of the most devastating pandemics in world history should not be considered wasteful.	4_1.4.6.4.	Trying to develop a vaccine that would increase human immunity to one of the most devastating pandemics in world history should not be considered wasteful.	pro	
many effective vaccines have been successfully produced.	4_1.4.6.5.	Many effective vaccines have been successfully produced.	pro	Two of the major vaccines have over 90% efficacy, which means that they will dramatically reduce the likelihood of infection.	The Sinopharm vaccine has only 79% efficacy.	According to the results from an interim trial, Sputnik V is 91.6% effective against symptomatic COVID-19.	The vaccines that have so far been developed are less effective against newer strains.
according to the results from an interim trial, sputnik v is 91.6% effective against symptomatic covid-19.	4_1.4.6.5.3.	According to the results from an interim trial, Sputnik V is 91.6% effective against symptomatic COVID-19.	pro	
the vaccines that have so far been developed are less effective against newer strains.	4_1.4.6.5.4.	The vaccines that have so far been developed are less effective against newer strains.	con	The rollout of the AstraZeneca vaccine in South Africa has been halted due to its limited effectiveness against the mutated strain of COVID-19.	Vaccines are less effective against the COVID-19 variant, B117.	It is easier and less time-intensive to adapt the current vaccines so that they are effective against these new strains now that a general vaccine has been made against COVID-19.
the rollout of the astrazeneca vaccine in south africa has been halted due to its limited effectiveness against the mutated strain of covid-19.	4_1.4.6.5.4.1.	The rollout of the AstraZeneca vaccine in South Africa has been halted due to its limited effectiveness against the mutated strain of COVID-19.	con	A study has found that the vaccine is only 10% effective against the South African variant.
a study has found that the vaccine is only 10% effective against the south african variant.	4_1.4.6.5.4.1.1.	A study has found that the vaccine is only 10% effective against the South African variant.	con	
vaccines are less effective against the covid-19 variant, b117.	4_1.4.6.5.4.2.	Vaccines are less effective against the COVID-19 variant, B117.	con	
it is easier and less time-intensive to adapt the current vaccines so that they are effective against these new strains now that a general vaccine has been made against covid-19.	4_1.4.6.5.4.3.	It is easier and less time-intensive to adapt the current vaccines so that they are effective against these new strains now that a general vaccine has been made against COVID-19.	pro	The flu vaccine is updated every year, demonstrating that it is both possible and not too difficult to adapt the vaccine as needed.
the flu vaccine is updated every year, demonstrating that it is both possible and not too difficult to adapt the vaccine as needed.	4_1.4.6.5.4.3.1.	The flu vaccine is updated every year, demonstrating that it is both possible and not too difficult to adapt the vaccine as needed.	pro	
the uk government has spent nearly £12bn on the covid-19 vaccine.	4_1.4.6.6.	The UK government has spent nearly £12bn on the COVID-19 vaccine.	con	The UK government has invested £100 million to establish a centre to scale up COVID-19 vaccine and gene therapy manufacturing.
the uk government has invested £100 million to establish a centre to scale up covid-19 vaccine and gene therapy manufacturing.	4_1.4.6.6.1.	The UK government has invested £100 million to establish a centre to scale up COVID-19 vaccine and gene therapy manufacturing.	con	
the quickest and safest way to develop herd immunity is through a mandatory vaccination policy.	4_1.5.	The quickest and safest way to develop herd immunity is through a mandatory vaccination policy.	pro	Even if the supply of COVID-19 vaccines is not an issue, the distribution process would be a "logistical nightmare," which presents a significant challenge.	Herd immunity is the most effective way to protect all members of a community from an infectious disease.	The possibility of reinfection has not yet been ruled out and would make attaining herd immunity practically impossible.	Due to growing anti-vaccination sentiment, it is unlikely that the government will be able to enforce mandatory vaccinations.	Attaching vaccine requirements to attend schools or daycares have been shown to significantly increase the vaccination rate to herd immunity levels in the US.	To help us decide whether vaccines for COVID-19 should be mandatory, and better understand if it is the right move for society, we need to be looking at the death tolls caused by COVID-19 rather than the confirmed cases of COVID-19.	The COVID-19 pandemic has caused widespread suffering. In order to alleviate these harms, it is critical that a solution be found to the pandemic as quickly as possible.
even if the supply of covid-19 vaccines is not an issue, the distribution process would be a "logistical nightmare," which presents a significant challenge.	4_1.5.1.	Even if the supply of COVID-19 vaccines is not an issue, the distribution process would be a "logistical nightmare," which presents a significant challenge.	con	Medical and public health experts have expressed concerns about how a policy of mandatory vaccination could be carried out.	There are already places where vaccines have so far been distributed smoothly.	Countries can draw upon expertise from various sectors to effectively distribute COVID-19 vaccines.	Some vaccines are required to be stored at ultra-cold temperatures, which is difficult and expensive to achieve.	Some of the COVID-19 vaccines require two doses, spaced two weeks apart. This massively stunts global production and increases costs for distributing the vaccine.
medical and public health experts have expressed concerns about how a policy of mandatory vaccination could be carried out.	4_1.5.1.1.	Medical and public health experts have expressed concerns about how a policy of mandatory vaccination could be carried out.	con	Vaccine rollout in the US has faced many setbacks.
vaccine rollout in the us has faced many setbacks.	4_1.5.1.1.1.	Vaccine rollout in the US has faced many setbacks.	con	
there are already places where vaccines have so far been distributed smoothly.	4_1.5.1.2.	There are already places where vaccines have so far been distributed smoothly.	pro	One in three Israelis have been vaccinated after a little more than a month of vaccinations.	Due to the lack of resources, hospitals in the US have struggled to distribute the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines.	There have been a number of logistical issues impeding the distribution of the vaccine in India.	Turkey's deployment of the vaccine has so far been a success.	West Virginia has vaccinated 84.5% of its population.	Bahrain has had great success in procuring and distributing the vaccine to its people.
one in three israelis have been vaccinated after a little more than a month of vaccinations.	4_1.5.1.2.1.	One in three Israelis have been vaccinated after a little more than a month of vaccinations.	pro	Almost all Palestinians in the Occupied Territories are waiting for their first dose of a COVID-19 vaccination.
almost all palestinians in the occupied territories are waiting for their first dose of a covid-19 vaccination.	4_1.5.1.2.1.1.	Almost all Palestinians in the Occupied Territories are waiting for their first dose of a COVID-19 vaccination.	con	
due to the lack of resources, hospitals in the us have struggled to distribute the pfizer and moderna vaccines.	4_1.5.1.2.2.	Due to the lack of resources, hospitals in the US have struggled to distribute the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines.	con	
there have been a number of logistical issues impeding the distribution of the vaccine in india.	4_1.5.1.2.3.	There have been a number of logistical issues impeding the distribution of the vaccine in India.	con	
turkey's deployment of the vaccine has so far been a success.	4_1.5.1.2.4.	Turkey's deployment of the vaccine has so far been a success.	pro	
west virginia has vaccinated 84.5% of its population.	4_1.5.1.2.5.	West Virginia has vaccinated 84.5% of its population.	pro	
bahrain has had great success in procuring and distributing the vaccine to its people.	4_1.5.1.2.6.	Bahrain has had great success in procuring and distributing the vaccine to its people.	pro	
countries can draw upon expertise from various sectors to effectively distribute covid-19 vaccines.	4_1.5.1.3.	Countries can draw upon expertise from various sectors to effectively distribute COVID-19 vaccines.	pro	
some vaccines are required to be stored at ultra-cold temperatures, which is difficult and expensive to achieve.	4_1.5.1.4.	Some vaccines are required to be stored at ultra-cold temperatures, which is difficult and expensive to achieve.	con	
some of the covid-19 vaccines require two doses, spaced two weeks apart. this massively stunts global production and increases costs for distributing the vaccine.	4_1.5.1.5.	Some of the COVID-19 vaccines require two doses, spaced two weeks apart. This massively stunts global production and increases costs for distributing the vaccine.	con	A vaccine that requires multiple doses also requires a well established "information system" to determine who has received what dose and when, further increasing costs and logistical problems.	The shortfall in the supply of the vaccine has impeded its rollout in the UK.
a vaccine that requires multiple doses also requires a well established "information system" to determine who has received what dose and when, further increasing costs and logistical problems.	4_1.5.1.5.1.	A vaccine that requires multiple doses also requires a well established "information system" to determine who has received what dose and when, further increasing costs and logistical problems.	con	
the shortfall in the supply of the vaccine has impeded its rollout in the uk.	4_1.5.1.5.2.	The shortfall in the supply of the vaccine has impeded its rollout in the UK.	con	
herd immunity is the most effective way to protect all members of a community from an infectious disease.	4_1.5.2.	Herd immunity is the most effective way to protect all members of a community from an infectious disease.	pro	Herd immunity is most effective when the maximum number of people are vaccinated.	Herd immunity protects people who have a legitimate exemption from getting vaccinated from contracting COVID-19.	Herd immunity is not a foolproof method of disease prevention.	Herd immunity is more efficiently achieved through letting the virus naturally spread as people build up resistance to the disease.	Not every vaccine creates herd immunity.
herd immunity is most effective when the maximum number of people are vaccinated.	4_1.5.2.1.	Herd immunity is most effective when the maximum number of people are vaccinated.	pro	
herd immunity protects people who have a legitimate exemption from getting vaccinated from contracting covid-19.	4_1.5.2.2.	Herd immunity protects people who have a legitimate exemption from getting vaccinated from contracting COVID-19.	pro	While herd immunity is not always 100% effective, it has been shown to be extremely effective and important for protecting the small number of individuals who cannot receive a vaccine or do not generate a strong immune response from a vaccine.
while herd immunity is not always 100% effective, it has been shown to be extremely effective and important for protecting the small number of individuals who cannot receive a vaccine or do not generate a strong immune response from a vaccine.	4_1.5.2.2.1.	While herd immunity is not always 100% effective, it has been shown to be extremely effective and important for protecting the small number of individuals who cannot receive a vaccine or do not generate a strong immune response from a vaccine.	pro	
herd immunity is not a foolproof method of disease prevention.	4_1.5.2.3.	Herd immunity is not a foolproof method of disease prevention.	con	Even in areas with high vaccination rates where herd immunity has been developed, its effectiveness varies based on the people in the community's habits. Changing locations, travelling, or interacting with wide amounts of new people can change the composition of one's "herd" and lower the level of protection against the disease.	Herd immunity does not need to be "foolproof" to be a worthwhile endeavor.
even in areas with high vaccination rates where herd immunity has been developed, its effectiveness varies based on the people in the community's habits. changing locations, travelling, or interacting with wide amounts of new people can change the composition of one's "herd" and lower the level of protection against the disease.	4_1.5.2.3.1.	Even in areas with high vaccination rates where herd immunity has been developed, its effectiveness varies based on the people in the community's habits. Changing locations, travelling, or interacting with wide amounts of new people can change the composition of one's "herd" and lower the level of protection against the disease.	con	
herd immunity does not need to be "foolproof" to be a worthwhile endeavor.	4_1.5.2.3.2.	Herd immunity does not need to be "foolproof" to be a worthwhile endeavor.	pro	While herd immunity is not always 100% effective, it has been shown to be extremely effective and important for protecting the small number of individuals who cannot receive a vaccine or do not generate a strong immune response from a vaccine.	The higher the percentage of those who have achieved immunity, the harder it becomes for a disease to find suitable hosts to spread.
the higher the percentage of those who have achieved immunity, the harder it becomes for a disease to find suitable hosts to spread.	4_1.5.2.3.2.2.	The higher the percentage of those who have achieved immunity, the harder it becomes for a disease to find suitable hosts to spread.	pro	
herd immunity is more efficiently achieved through letting the virus naturally spread as people build up resistance to the disease.	4_1.5.2.4.	Herd immunity is more efficiently achieved through letting the virus naturally spread as people build up resistance to the disease.	con	Studies show that, even in areas with large numbers of COVID-19 infections, only 10% of the population developed immunity. This means that without vaccination COVID-19 could remain endemic.	The human cost of allowing herd immunity to develop through natural infection is too great to bear.	The World Health Organization has condemned natural herd immunity as a strategy for fighting COVID-19.	If it turns out that people infected with COVID-19 develop permanent immunity, we might achieve herd immunity before we have a vaccination.	It would be a waste of resources since already immune and healthy people don't need the vaccine. Over 77.5 million people worldwide have recovered from COVID-19 as of February 2021, and the risk of contracting the virus again is very low. Most of them are now immunized and don't need the vaccine.	Creating community immunity through mandatory vaccination increases the chances of COVID-19 mutating enough to render the vaccine ineffective.
studies show that, even in areas with large numbers of covid-19 infections, only 10% of the population developed immunity. this means that without vaccination covid-19 could remain endemic.	4_1.5.2.4.1.	Studies show that, even in areas with large numbers of COVID-19 infections, only 10% of the population developed immunity. This means that without vaccination COVID-19 could remain endemic.	pro	The preliminary estimated percentage of the population requiring infection to achieve sustainable herd immunity for COVID-19 is around 40-70%.	These numbers are likely to be an underestimate due to the fact that people with mild infections are not being tested.
the preliminary estimated percentage of the population requiring infection to achieve sustainable herd immunity for covid-19 is around 40-70%.	4_1.5.2.4.1.1.	The preliminary estimated percentage of the population requiring infection to achieve sustainable herd immunity for COVID-19 is around 40-70%.	pro	
these numbers are likely to be an underestimate due to the fact that people with mild infections are not being tested.	4_1.5.2.4.1.2.	These numbers are likely to be an underestimate due to the fact that people with mild infections are not being tested.	con	
the human cost of allowing herd immunity to develop through natural infection is too great to bear.	4_1.5.2.4.2.	The human cost of allowing herd immunity to develop through natural infection is too great to bear.	pro	Typically, community immunity only results when 93-95% of the population are infected and achieve immunity.	The severity of COVID-19 means that allowing natural infection carries a much greater risk of severe disease and death. In the case of other diseases, for which community immunity built up through natural spread, the harm was significantly lower.	Allowing the natural spread of COVID-19 could overwhelm doctors and medical facilities.
typically, community immunity only results when 93-95% of the population are infected and achieve immunity.	4_1.5.2.4.2.1.	Typically, community immunity only results when 93-95% of the population are infected and achieve immunity.	pro	
the severity of covid-19 means that allowing natural infection carries a much greater risk of severe disease and death. in the case of other diseases, for which community immunity built up through natural spread, the harm was significantly lower.	4_1.5.2.4.2.2.	The severity of COVID-19 means that allowing natural infection carries a much greater risk of severe disease and death. In the case of other diseases, for which community immunity built up through natural spread, the harm was significantly lower.	pro	The current case-fatality rate of COVID-19 is roughly 1%. If we are to reach the required threshold for herd immunity i.e. infection of 70% of the global population, more than 54 million people would die.
the current case-fatality rate of covid-19 is roughly 1%. if we are to reach the required threshold for herd immunity i.e. infection of 70% of the global population, more than 54 million people would die.	4_1.5.2.4.2.2.1.	The current case-fatality rate of COVID-19 is roughly 1%. If we are to reach the required threshold for herd immunity i.e. infection of 70% of the global population, more than 54 million people would die.	pro	
allowing the natural spread of covid-19 could overwhelm doctors and medical facilities.	4_1.5.2.4.2.3.	Allowing the natural spread of COVID-19 could overwhelm doctors and medical facilities.	pro	
the world health organization has condemned natural herd immunity as a strategy for fighting covid-19.	4_1.5.2.4.3.	The World Health Organization has condemned natural herd immunity as a strategy for fighting COVID-19.	pro	
if it turns out that people infected with covid-19 develop permanent immunity, we might achieve herd immunity before we have a vaccination.	4_1.5.2.4.4.	If it turns out that people infected with COVID-19 develop permanent immunity, we might achieve herd immunity before we have a vaccination.	con	Sweden, which has never implemented a full-scale lockdown, nor had a mask policy, has had success combatting COVID-19 by allowing it to naturally spread to develop community immunity.	Scientists worked at record speed to produce a vaccine for COVID-19 in under a year, well before natural herd immunity could be attained.	If most people already develop immunity before a vaccine is developed, the primary beneficiaries of vaccination will be very few.
sweden, which has never implemented a full-scale lockdown, nor had a mask policy, has had success combatting covid-19 by allowing it to naturally spread to develop community immunity.	4_1.5.2.4.4.1.	Sweden, which has never implemented a full-scale lockdown, nor had a mask policy, has had success combatting COVID-19 by allowing it to naturally spread to develop community immunity.	con	The proportion of Swedish citizens currently carrying COVID-19 antibodies is less than 10%, far from the percentage needed for community immunity.	Sweden's top public health official stated that "the Swedish strategy is working," in response to data that showed a rapid decline in COVID-19 cases and death rates in Sweden.	Sweden has reversed many of its lax policies on account of its relative failure compared to countries that enforced stricter measures.
the proportion of swedish citizens currently carrying covid-19 antibodies is less than 10%, far from the percentage needed for community immunity.	4_1.5.2.4.4.1.1.	The proportion of Swedish citizens currently carrying COVID-19 antibodies is less than 10%, far from the percentage needed for community immunity.	pro	
sweden's top public health official stated that "the swedish strategy is working," in response to data that showed a rapid decline in covid-19 cases and death rates in sweden.	4_1.5.2.4.4.1.2.	Sweden's top public health official stated that "the Swedish strategy is working," in response to data that showed a rapid decline in COVID-19 cases and death rates in Sweden.	con	Developing community immunity is not an official goal of the Swedish Public Health Agency.
developing community immunity is not an official goal of the swedish public health agency.	4_1.5.2.4.4.1.2.1.	Developing community immunity is not an official goal of the Swedish Public Health Agency.	pro	
sweden has reversed many of its lax policies on account of its relative failure compared to countries that enforced stricter measures.	4_1.5.2.4.4.1.3.	Sweden has reversed many of its lax policies on account of its relative failure compared to countries that enforced stricter measures.	pro	In July 2020, Sweden had one of the highest death rates per million inhabitants, 564 deaths per million. Comparatively, the U.S. sat at 444 deaths per million.
in july 2020, sweden had one of the highest death rates per million inhabitants, 564 deaths per million. comparatively, the u.s. sat at 444 deaths per million.	4_1.5.2.4.4.1.3.1.	In July 2020, Sweden had one of the highest death rates per million inhabitants, 564 deaths per million. Comparatively, the U.S. sat at 444 deaths per million.	pro	
scientists worked at record speed to produce a vaccine for covid-19 in under a year, well before natural herd immunity could be attained.	4_1.5.2.4.4.2.	Scientists worked at record speed to produce a vaccine for COVID-19 in under a year, well before natural herd immunity could be attained.	pro	
if most people already develop immunity before a vaccine is developed, the primary beneficiaries of vaccination will be very few.	4_1.5.2.4.4.3.	If most people already develop immunity before a vaccine is developed, the primary beneficiaries of vaccination will be very few.	con	
it would be a waste of resources since already immune and healthy people don't need the vaccine. over 77.5 million people worldwide have recovered from covid-19 as of february 2021, and the risk of contracting the virus again is very low. most of them are now immunized and don't need the vaccine.	4_1.5.2.4.5.	It would be a waste of resources since already immune and healthy people don't need the vaccine. Over 77.5 million people worldwide have recovered from COVID-19 as of February 2021, and the risk of contracting the virus again is very low. Most of them are now immunized and don't need the vaccine.	con	In a study, repeat infections of COVID-19 occurred in less than 1% of the patients included in the trial.	It is unclear whether immunity after a COVID-19 infection lasts more than eight months.
in a study, repeat infections of covid-19 occurred in less than 1% of the patients included in the trial.	4_1.5.2.4.5.1.	In a study, repeat infections of COVID-19 occurred in less than 1% of the patients included in the trial.	con	Reinfection tends to have more severe effects than those caused by the first case of COVID-19 infection. In order to avoid this, it is likely that even those who have been infected will seek out the vaccine and will thus need to be catered to. This is a problem given the global vaccine shortfall.
reinfection tends to have more severe effects than those caused by the first case of covid-19 infection. in order to avoid this, it is likely that even those who have been infected will seek out the vaccine and will thus need to be catered to. this is a problem given the global vaccine shortfall.	4_1.5.2.4.5.1.1.	Reinfection tends to have more severe effects than those caused by the first case of COVID-19 infection. In order to avoid this, it is likely that even those who have been infected will seek out the vaccine and will thus need to be catered to. This is a problem given the global vaccine shortfall.	pro	
it is unclear whether immunity after a covid-19 infection lasts more than eight months.	4_1.5.2.4.5.2.	It is unclear whether immunity after a COVID-19 infection lasts more than eight months.	pro	
creating community immunity through mandatory vaccination increases the chances of covid-19 mutating enough to render the vaccine ineffective.	4_1.5.2.4.6.	Creating community immunity through mandatory vaccination increases the chances of COVID-19 mutating enough to render the vaccine ineffective.	con	The vaccines that have so far been developed are less effective against newer strains.	When antigenic drift occurs, the body's immune system struggles to recognize and fight the newer virus. This is why people can get the flu more than once, and why the flu vaccine is reviewed and updated yearly.
when antigenic drift occurs, the body's immune system struggles to recognize and fight the newer virus. this is why people can get the flu more than once, and why the flu vaccine is reviewed and updated yearly.	4_1.5.2.4.6.2.	When antigenic drift occurs, the body's immune system struggles to recognize and fight the newer virus. This is why people can get the flu more than once, and why the flu vaccine is reviewed and updated yearly.	con	Vaccines that are constantly updated, such as the seasonal influenza vaccine, still prevent rampant illness.
vaccines that are constantly updated, such as the seasonal influenza vaccine, still prevent rampant illness.	4_1.5.2.4.6.2.1.	Vaccines that are constantly updated, such as the seasonal influenza vaccine, still prevent rampant illness.	pro	
not every vaccine creates herd immunity.	4_1.5.2.5.	Not every vaccine creates herd immunity.	con	
the possibility of reinfection has not yet been ruled out and would make attaining herd immunity practically impossible.	4_1.5.3.	The possibility of reinfection has not yet been ruled out and would make attaining herd immunity practically impossible.	con	Studies of those who have previously contracted COVID-19 show that most people do not retain the antibodies built up by the body after infection.	The first documented case of COVID-19 reinfection has already occurred in Hong Kong, raising doubts as to the longevity of COVID-19 immunity.	In current clinical trials with monkeys, several studies have shown a promising strong and long-lasting immune response to COVID-19.	In other coronaviruses, such as Sars-CoV and MERS-CoV, scientists have found immunity was borne in those who contracted the diseases and it lasted for multiple years.	In a study, repeat infections of COVID-19 occurred in less than 1% of the patients included in the trial.
studies of those who have previously contracted covid-19 show that most people do not retain the antibodies built up by the body after infection.	4_1.5.3.1.	Studies of those who have previously contracted COVID-19 show that most people do not retain the antibodies built up by the body after infection.	con	Regular booster shots would make this point irrelevant, as they could be designed to keep antibodies at a high level. These would arguably need to be required in order for a mandate to be worthwhile.	COVID-19 antibodies are not the only measure of immunity. T-cell adaption to COVID-19 may also grant immunity to the disease and scientists have measured stable T-cell buildup in patients who previously contracted COVID-19 without detectable antibodies.	Waning antibodies are an early indicator of an inability to create a lasting COVID-19 vaccine.	Many people who only develop mild symptoms show a significant level of COVID-19 antibodies over a course of three months.
regular booster shots would make this point irrelevant, as they could be designed to keep antibodies at a high level. these would arguably need to be required in order for a mandate to be worthwhile.	4_1.5.3.1.1.	Regular booster shots would make this point irrelevant, as they could be designed to keep antibodies at a high level. These would arguably need to be required in order for a mandate to be worthwhile.	pro	
covid-19 antibodies are not the only measure of immunity. t-cell adaption to covid-19 may also grant immunity to the disease and scientists have measured stable t-cell buildup in patients who previously contracted covid-19 without detectable antibodies.	4_1.5.3.1.2.	COVID-19 antibodies are not the only measure of immunity. T-cell adaption to COVID-19 may also grant immunity to the disease and scientists have measured stable T-cell buildup in patients who previously contracted COVID-19 without detectable antibodies.	pro	A growing scientific consensus suggests that T-cell response is the strongest indicator of long-lasting immunity to COVID-19.	Scientists have also measured memory B cells with "hallmarks of \immunity\ functionality" in those who have recovered from COVID-19.
a growing scientific consensus suggests that t-cell response is the strongest indicator of long-lasting immunity to covid-19.	4_1.5.3.1.2.1.	A growing scientific consensus suggests that T-cell response is the strongest indicator of long-lasting immunity to COVID-19.	pro	
scientists have also measured memory b cells with "hallmarks of \immunity\ functionality" in those who have recovered from covid-19.	4_1.5.3.1.2.2.	Scientists have also measured memory B cells with "hallmarks of \immunity\ functionality" in those who have recovered from COVID-19.	pro	
waning antibodies are an early indicator of an inability to create a lasting covid-19 vaccine.	4_1.5.3.1.3.	Waning antibodies are an early indicator of an inability to create a lasting COVID-19 vaccine.	con	Over a period of 3 months, researchers found a 11.7% decline in COVID-19 neutralizing antibodies in symptomatic COVID-19 patients.	It is not unusual for the body to have a fading antibody presence over the course of several months.
over a period of 3 months, researchers found a 11.7% decline in covid-19 neutralizing antibodies in symptomatic covid-19 patients.	4_1.5.3.1.3.1.	Over a period of 3 months, researchers found a 11.7% decline in COVID-19 neutralizing antibodies in symptomatic COVID-19 patients.	con	
it is not unusual for the body to have a fading antibody presence over the course of several months.	4_1.5.3.1.3.2.	It is not unusual for the body to have a fading antibody presence over the course of several months.	pro	
many people who only develop mild symptoms show a significant level of covid-19 antibodies over a course of three months.	4_1.5.3.1.4.	Many people who only develop mild symptoms show a significant level of COVID-19 antibodies over a course of three months.	pro	
the first documented case of covid-19 reinfection has already occurred in hong kong, raising doubts as to the longevity of covid-19 immunity.	4_1.5.3.2.	The first documented case of COVID-19 reinfection has already occurred in Hong Kong, raising doubts as to the longevity of COVID-19 immunity.	con	The patient's second infection was entirely asymptomatic. The patient's natural immunity may not have prevented reinfection, but it did prevent the disease from affecting his body.	The patient had no detectable COVID-19 antibodies after his contraction of COVID-19.
the patient's second infection was entirely asymptomatic. the patient's natural immunity may not have prevented reinfection, but it did prevent the disease from affecting his body.	4_1.5.3.2.1.	The patient's second infection was entirely asymptomatic. The patient's natural immunity may not have prevented reinfection, but it did prevent the disease from affecting his body.	pro	
the patient had no detectable covid-19 antibodies after his contraction of covid-19.	4_1.5.3.2.2.	The patient had no detectable COVID-19 antibodies after his contraction of COVID-19.	con	The patient developed COVID-19 antibodies after his second infection of COVID-19, leading researchers to have a more positive outlook on the development of long-lasting T-cells that prevent negative symptoms on re-infection.
the patient developed covid-19 antibodies after his second infection of covid-19, leading researchers to have a more positive outlook on the development of long-lasting t-cells that prevent negative symptoms on re-infection.	4_1.5.3.2.2.1.	The patient developed COVID-19 antibodies after his second infection of COVID-19, leading researchers to have a more positive outlook on the development of long-lasting T-cells that prevent negative symptoms on re-infection.	pro	
in current clinical trials with monkeys, several studies have shown a promising strong and long-lasting immune response to covid-19.	4_1.5.3.3.	In current clinical trials with monkeys, several studies have shown a promising strong and long-lasting immune response to COVID-19.	pro	
in other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and mers-cov, scientists have found immunity was borne in those who contracted the diseases and it lasted for multiple years.	4_1.5.3.4.	In other coronaviruses, such as Sars-CoV and MERS-CoV, scientists have found immunity was borne in those who contracted the diseases and it lasted for multiple years.	pro	
due to growing anti-vaccination sentiment, it is unlikely that the government will be able to enforce mandatory vaccinations.	4_1.5.4.	Due to growing anti-vaccination sentiment, it is unlikely that the government will be able to enforce mandatory vaccinations.	con	It is enough if all the people who believe in vaccination are vaccinated to achieve herd immunity. There is no need to make vaccination mandatory for those who don't believe in it.	Attaching vaccine requirements to attend schools or daycares have been shown to significantly increase the vaccination rate to herd immunity levels in the US.	If people do not wish to vaccinate, they are perfectly at liberty to compromise their own health and wellbeing - their example provides a net good to society, viscerally demonstrating why it is necessary.	Forcing citizens to undergo a medical procedure against their will increases mistrust in public institutions and increases the influence of the anti-vaccination movement.	A significant proportion of the global population perceives vaccines as unsafe or unnecessary.	To allay fears concerning the vaccine, many politicians are receiving the vaccine on camera.
it is enough if all the people who believe in vaccination are vaccinated to achieve herd immunity. there is no need to make vaccination mandatory for those who don't believe in it.	4_1.5.4.1.	It is enough if all the people who believe in vaccination are vaccinated to achieve herd immunity. There is no need to make vaccination mandatory for those who don't believe in it.	pro	
attaching vaccine requirements to attend schools or daycares have been shown to significantly increase the vaccination rate to herd immunity levels in the us.	4_1.5.4.2.	Attaching vaccine requirements to attend schools or daycares have been shown to significantly increase the vaccination rate to herd immunity levels in the US.	pro	Since the implementation of mandatory vaccination requirements in 1981, vaccination levels for school entrants have been 95% higher (p. 270.
since the implementation of mandatory vaccination requirements in 1981, vaccination levels for school entrants have been 95% higher (p. 270.	4_1.5.4.2.1.	Since the implementation of mandatory vaccination requirements in 1981, vaccination levels for school entrants have been 95% higher (p. 270.	pro	
if people do not wish to vaccinate, they are perfectly at liberty to compromise their own health and wellbeing - their example provides a net good to society, viscerally demonstrating why it is necessary.	4_1.5.4.3.	If people do not wish to vaccinate, they are perfectly at liberty to compromise their own health and wellbeing - their example provides a net good to society, viscerally demonstrating why it is necessary.	con	Populations who would refuse vaccinations would form the control group allowing us to evaluate the benefits and problems of the vaccines.
populations who would refuse vaccinations would form the control group allowing us to evaluate the benefits and problems of the vaccines.	4_1.5.4.3.1.	Populations who would refuse vaccinations would form the control group allowing us to evaluate the benefits and problems of the vaccines.	con	
a significant proportion of the global population perceives vaccines as unsafe or unnecessary.	4_1.5.4.5.	A significant proportion of the global population perceives vaccines as unsafe or unnecessary.	con	Surveys conducted in July 2020 and August 2020 respectively revealed that nearly one in six Britons and one in three Americans will refuse COVID-19 vaccination.	A survey conducted in December 2020 found that 60% of the US population intended to get the vaccine.
surveys conducted in july 2020 and august 2020 respectively revealed that nearly one in six britons and one in three americans will refuse covid-19 vaccination.	4_1.5.4.5.1.	Surveys conducted in July 2020 and August 2020 respectively revealed that nearly one in six Britons and one in three Americans will refuse COVID-19 vaccination.	con	
a survey conducted in december 2020 found that 60% of the us population intended to get the vaccine.	4_1.5.4.5.2.	A survey conducted in December 2020 found that 60% of the US population intended to get the vaccine.	pro	
to allay fears concerning the vaccine, many politicians are receiving the vaccine on camera.	4_1.5.4.6.	To allay fears concerning the vaccine, many politicians are receiving the vaccine on camera.	pro	Social media influencers are being given vaccines as a priority in Indonesia to try and engender public trust in the process.
social media influencers are being given vaccines as a priority in indonesia to try and engender public trust in the process.	4_1.5.4.6.1.	Social media influencers are being given vaccines as a priority in Indonesia to try and engender public trust in the process.	pro	
to help us decide whether vaccines for covid-19 should be mandatory, and better understand if it is the right move for society, we need to be looking at the death tolls caused by covid-19 rather than the confirmed cases of covid-19.	4_1.5.6.	To help us decide whether vaccines for COVID-19 should be mandatory, and better understand if it is the right move for society, we need to be looking at the death tolls caused by COVID-19 rather than the confirmed cases of COVID-19.	con	COVID-19 is not equally deadly in all regions. Countries, where the death rate due to infection is low, do not need to spend money on vaccination for every member of their population.
covid-19 is not equally deadly in all regions. countries, where the death rate due to infection is low, do not need to spend money on vaccination for every member of their population.	4_1.5.6.1.	COVID-19 is not equally deadly in all regions. Countries, where the death rate due to infection is low, do not need to spend money on vaccination for every member of their population.	con	
the covid-19 pandemic has caused widespread suffering. in order to alleviate these harms, it is critical that a solution be found to the pandemic as quickly as possible.	4_1.5.7.	The COVID-19 pandemic has caused widespread suffering. In order to alleviate these harms, it is critical that a solution be found to the pandemic as quickly as possible.	pro	COVID-19 has had negative consequences on the economy. This diminishes the well-being of many people by reducing their incomes. Mandatory vaccination will curb the economic downturn from intensifying further and restore well-being by stopping the continued spread of the virus.	Vaccines are not 100% effective. It is possible for vaccinated individuals to get infected.	COVID-19 disproportionately impacts marginalized groups who already are victims of historic and current injustices. Not vaccinating entails the continuation of suffering for such groups.	If vaccines are mandatory and not free, it burdens low-income earners by forcing them to pay from an already low resource pool.
covid-19 has had negative consequences on the economy. this diminishes the well-being of many people by reducing their incomes. mandatory vaccination will curb the economic downturn from intensifying further and restore well-being by stopping the continued spread of the virus.	4_1.5.7.1.	COVID-19 has had negative consequences on the economy. This diminishes the well-being of many people by reducing their incomes. Mandatory vaccination will curb the economic downturn from intensifying further and restore well-being by stopping the continued spread of the virus.	pro	Marginalized populations are unlikely to feel the effects of the economic recovery without additional policy interventions.	Without vaccines, schools will not be able to fully re-open.	Social distancing measures, caused by the spread of COVID-19, have had the biggest negative impact on the economy.	Investor confidence, a key driver of the economy, was deeply shaken by the pandemic and will recover well past when the pandemic ends.	The long-term side effects of COVID-19 may permanently limit the economic output of parts of the workforce. Stopping its spread will limit this damage.
marginalized populations are unlikely to feel the effects of the economic recovery without additional policy interventions.	4_1.5.7.1.1.	Marginalized populations are unlikely to feel the effects of the economic recovery without additional policy interventions.	con	
social distancing measures, caused by the spread of covid-19, have had the biggest negative impact on the economy.	4_1.5.7.1.3.	Social distancing measures, caused by the spread of COVID-19, have had the biggest negative impact on the economy.	pro	
investor confidence, a key driver of the economy, was deeply shaken by the pandemic and will recover well past when the pandemic ends.	4_1.5.7.1.4.	Investor confidence, a key driver of the economy, was deeply shaken by the pandemic and will recover well past when the pandemic ends.	con	Without substantial economic relief measures from governments, it is unlikely that economies will recover simply by virtue of the pandemic coming to an end.	The S&P 500, which is an index used by investors as a benchmark for the overall market, fell by 34% in March 2020.	Stock markets have already begun to show signs of bouncing back and most of them have already recovered from the shock.
without substantial economic relief measures from governments, it is unlikely that economies will recover simply by virtue of the pandemic coming to an end.	4_1.5.7.1.4.1.	Without substantial economic relief measures from governments, it is unlikely that economies will recover simply by virtue of the pandemic coming to an end.	con	
the s&p 500, which is an index used by investors as a benchmark for the overall market, fell by 34% in march 2020.	4_1.5.7.1.4.2.	The S&P 500, which is an index used by investors as a benchmark for the overall market, fell by 34% in March 2020.	con	The US stock market hit a new high in August 2020.
the us stock market hit a new high in august 2020.	4_1.5.7.1.4.3.2.	The US stock market hit a new high in August 2020.	pro	
stock markets have already begun to show signs of bouncing back and most of them have already recovered from the shock.	4_1.5.7.1.4.3.	Stock markets have already begun to show signs of bouncing back and most of them have already recovered from the shock.	pro	The Chinese economy started to recover from the effects of the virus in December 2020.	The US stock market hit a new high in August 2020.	The stock market is not a reflection of the health of an economy.
the chinese economy started to recover from the effects of the virus in december 2020.	4_1.5.7.1.4.3.1.	The Chinese economy started to recover from the effects of the virus in December 2020.	pro	
the stock market is not a reflection of the health of an economy.	4_1.5.7.1.4.3.3.	The stock market is not a reflection of the health of an economy.	con	
the long-term side effects of covid-19 may permanently limit the economic output of parts of the workforce. stopping its spread will limit this damage.	4_1.5.7.1.5.	The long-term side effects of COVID-19 may permanently limit the economic output of parts of the workforce. Stopping its spread will limit this damage.	pro	
vaccines are not 100% effective. it is possible for vaccinated individuals to get infected.	4_1.5.7.2.	Vaccines are not 100% effective. It is possible for vaccinated individuals to get infected.	con	The chances of dying from a breakthough infection are less than 1 in 58K vs the risk of death from COVID being 11 times greater for the unvaccinated
the chances of dying from a breakthough infection are less than 1 in 58k vs the risk of death from covid being 11 times greater for the unvaccinated	4_1.5.7.2.1.	The chances of dying from a breakthough infection are less than 1 in 58K vs the risk of death from COVID being 11 times greater for the unvaccinated	pro	
covid-19 disproportionately impacts marginalized groups who already are victims of historic and current injustices. not vaccinating entails the continuation of suffering for such groups.	4_1.5.7.3.	COVID-19 disproportionately impacts marginalized groups who already are victims of historic and current injustices. Not vaccinating entails the continuation of suffering for such groups.	pro	Marginalization should be solved at the root cause (economics) rather than removing individual rights.	COVID-19 has devastated prison populations, whose lives are the responsibility of the state.	The same issues impacting marginalized groups now will also impact the deployment of vaccinations to these groups, so it is likely many will not receive vaccinations.	The ripple effects of COVID-19 have disproportionately impacted the homeless population (p. 1.	Vaccination is unlikely to improve the living conditions of marginalized groups, because other key indicators, such as access to employment, declined during the pandemic and are unlikely to be restored.	Women and girls have been severely impacted by the ripple effects of the pandemic (p. 2.	Marginalized groups are extremely reluctant to take the vaccine. If vaccines are not mandated, many members of this group will continue to suffer from the harms of being infected.
marginalization should be solved at the root cause (economics) rather than removing individual rights.	4_1.5.7.3.1.	Marginalization should be solved at the root cause (economics) rather than removing individual rights.	con	Solving marginalization is a broader task that will take much more time to solve- in the meanwhile, the immediate harms being faced by marginalized communities must be addressed and mitigated.
solving marginalization is a broader task that will take much more time to solve- in the meanwhile, the immediate harms being faced by marginalized communities must be addressed and mitigated.	4_1.5.7.3.1.1.	Solving marginalization is a broader task that will take much more time to solve- in the meanwhile, the immediate harms being faced by marginalized communities must be addressed and mitigated.	pro	
covid-19 has devastated prison populations, whose lives are the responsibility of the state.	4_1.5.7.3.2.	COVID-19 has devastated prison populations, whose lives are the responsibility of the state.	pro	Prisoners cannot employ other prevention measures like social distancing, so a vaccine is their only real defense against the virus.	In order to protect their inmates from contracting COVID-19 in overcrowded prison settings, prisons have released some prisoners early.	Prison populations have high numbers of individuals with pre-existing conditions making them high risk for COVID-19.	Prisoners have access to medical care, but this does not mean the state must be held responsible for protecting them from every disease.
prisoners cannot employ other prevention measures like social distancing, so a vaccine is their only real defense against the virus.	4_1.5.7.3.2.1.	Prisoners cannot employ other prevention measures like social distancing, so a vaccine is their only real defense against the virus.	pro	
in order to protect their inmates from contracting covid-19 in overcrowded prison settings, prisons have released some prisoners early.	4_1.5.7.3.2.2.	In order to protect their inmates from contracting COVID-19 in overcrowded prison settings, prisons have released some prisoners early.	con	
prison populations have high numbers of individuals with pre-existing conditions making them high risk for covid-19.	4_1.5.7.3.2.3.	Prison populations have high numbers of individuals with pre-existing conditions making them high risk for COVID-19.	pro	
prisoners have access to medical care, but this does not mean the state must be held responsible for protecting them from every disease.	4_1.5.7.3.2.4.	Prisoners have access to medical care, but this does not mean the state must be held responsible for protecting them from every disease.	con	
the same issues impacting marginalized groups now will also impact the deployment of vaccinations to these groups, so it is likely many will not receive vaccinations.	4_1.5.7.3.3.	The same issues impacting marginalized groups now will also impact the deployment of vaccinations to these groups, so it is likely many will not receive vaccinations.	con	
the ripple effects of covid-19 have disproportionately impacted the homeless population (p. 1.	4_1.5.7.3.4.	The ripple effects of COVID-19 have disproportionately impacted the homeless population (p. 1.	pro	
vaccination is unlikely to improve the living conditions of marginalized groups, because other key indicators, such as access to employment, declined during the pandemic and are unlikely to be restored.	4_1.5.7.3.5.	Vaccination is unlikely to improve the living conditions of marginalized groups, because other key indicators, such as access to employment, declined during the pandemic and are unlikely to be restored.	con	
women and girls have been severely impacted by the ripple effects of the pandemic (p. 2.	4_1.5.7.3.6.	Women and girls have been severely impacted by the ripple effects of the pandemic (p. 2.	pro	The impacts of the COVID-19 global recession will result in a prolonged dip in women’s incomes and labor force participation, with compounded impacts for women already living in poverty (p. 4.	Mass vaccinations might not solve these ripple effects without additional economic recovery measures (p. 5.	Women are at higher risk of exposure to the virus because of occupational sex-segregation (p. 10.	In Latin America and the Caribbean, an additional 18 million women will lose regular access to modern contraceptives because of the pandemic (p. 10.
the impacts of the covid-19 global recession will result in a prolonged dip in women’s incomes and labor force participation, with compounded impacts for women already living in poverty (p. 4.	4_1.5.7.3.6.1.	The impacts of the COVID-19 global recession will result in a prolonged dip in women’s incomes and labor force participation, with compounded impacts for women already living in poverty (p. 4.	pro	
mass vaccinations might not solve these ripple effects without additional economic recovery measures (p. 5.	4_1.5.7.3.6.2.	Mass vaccinations might not solve these ripple effects without additional economic recovery measures (p. 5.	con	
women are at higher risk of exposure to the virus because of occupational sex-segregation (p. 10.	4_1.5.7.3.6.3.	Women are at higher risk of exposure to the virus because of occupational sex-segregation (p. 10.	pro	
in latin america and the caribbean, an additional 18 million women will lose regular access to modern contraceptives because of the pandemic (p. 10.	4_1.5.7.3.6.4.	In Latin America and the Caribbean, an additional 18 million women will lose regular access to modern contraceptives because of the pandemic (p. 10.	pro	
marginalized groups are extremely reluctant to take the vaccine. if vaccines are not mandated, many members of this group will continue to suffer from the harms of being infected.	4_1.5.7.3.7.	Marginalized groups are extremely reluctant to take the vaccine. If vaccines are not mandated, many members of this group will continue to suffer from the harms of being infected.	pro	Given the history of medical racism, it is understandable why these marginalized communities might be skeptical of vaccines. Mandating vaccines might increase this distrust.
given the history of medical racism, it is understandable why these marginalized communities might be skeptical of vaccines. mandating vaccines might increase this distrust.	4_1.5.7.3.7.1.	Given the history of medical racism, it is understandable why these marginalized communities might be skeptical of vaccines. Mandating vaccines might increase this distrust.	con	
if vaccines are mandatory and not free, it burdens low-income earners by forcing them to pay from an already low resource pool.	4_1.5.7.4.	If vaccines are mandatory and not free, it burdens low-income earners by forcing them to pay from an already low resource pool.	con	Some countries, such as Australia, are already considering making the vaccination available for free when it is made.	In some places, the government seems to be allowing pharmaceutical companies to decide on prices at which COVID-19 vaccines can be purchased. This could be expensive and unfair prices for many.	Not everyone can afford to pay for vaccines.
some countries, such as australia, are already considering making the vaccination available for free when it is made.	4_1.5.7.4.1.	Some countries, such as Australia, are already considering making the vaccination available for free when it is made.	pro	The COVID-19 vaccine will be free for all those residing in the US.	Norway will be providing the vaccine to its citizens free of charge.
the covid-19 vaccine will be free for all those residing in the us.	4_1.5.7.4.1.1.	The COVID-19 vaccine will be free for all those residing in the US.	pro	While the vaccine itself is free, there are certain hidden costs (such as the price of administering the vaccine) that could still pose a burden.
while the vaccine itself is free, there are certain hidden costs (such as the price of administering the vaccine) that could still pose a burden.	4_1.5.7.4.1.1.1.	While the vaccine itself is free, there are certain hidden costs (such as the price of administering the vaccine) that could still pose a burden.	con	
norway will be providing the vaccine to its citizens free of charge.	4_1.5.7.4.1.2.	Norway will be providing the vaccine to its citizens free of charge.	pro	
in some places, the government seems to be allowing pharmaceutical companies to decide on prices at which covid-19 vaccines can be purchased. this could be expensive and unfair prices for many.	4_1.5.7.4.2.	In some places, the government seems to be allowing pharmaceutical companies to decide on prices at which COVID-19 vaccines can be purchased. This could be expensive and unfair prices for many.	con	Some countries are considering enacting legislation against profiteering by pharmaceutical companies involved in making COVID-19 vaccines. This would ensure that the vaccines are available at affordable prices.
some countries are considering enacting legislation against profiteering by pharmaceutical companies involved in making covid-19 vaccines. this would ensure that the vaccines are available at affordable prices.	4_1.5.7.4.2.1.	Some countries are considering enacting legislation against profiteering by pharmaceutical companies involved in making COVID-19 vaccines. This would ensure that the vaccines are available at affordable prices.	pro	Governments have invested massively in pharmaceutical companies developing COVID-19 vaccines. It is therefore legitimate for the government to impose heavy taxes which can be used to fund the distribution of vaccines.
not everyone can afford to pay for vaccines.	4_1.5.7.4.3.	Not everyone can afford to pay for vaccines.	con	
despite a wide variety of attempted measures, covid-19 has continued to spread at a dangerous rate - vaccines are the best remaining option to protect and improve our lives.	4_1.6.	Despite a wide variety of attempted measures, COVID-19 has continued to spread at a dangerous rate - vaccines are the best remaining option to protect and improve our lives.	pro	Social distancing coupled with contact tracing and testing has proven effective at flattening the epidemic curve of COVID-19.	Even with perfect employment of social distancing measures, mask wearing, and personal hygiene, there is still a risk of infection without a vaccine.	There has not been perfect enforcement of other measures. New Zealand's example proves that incidences of COVID-19 spread can be virtually eliminated without a vaccine.	It will take a long time before most of the population can access the vaccines. We will need to continue using other measures to reduce the spread of COVID-19 infections and subsequently save lives.	Medical innovations in the treatment and suppression of COVID-19 symptoms make vaccinations unnecessary.	Vaccines are a proven way to stem the spread of infectious illnesses.	Vaccines are the least harmful way to mitigate the spread of COVID-19.
social distancing coupled with contact tracing and testing has proven effective at flattening the epidemic curve of covid-19.	4_1.6.1.	Social distancing coupled with contact tracing and testing has proven effective at flattening the epidemic curve of COVID-19.	con	In many poorer countries, it is either not possible or very destructive to enforce measures such as social distancing due to factors such as resource constraints and high population density.	These other measures require sustained, long-term adherence to be effective, increasing the risk of infection rates spiking.	It is not enough to flatten the curve if we want to reduce the mortality rate and the burden on healthcare systems.
in many poorer countries, it is either not possible or very destructive to enforce measures such as social distancing due to factors such as resource constraints and high population density.	4_1.6.1.1.	In many poorer countries, it is either not possible or very destructive to enforce measures such as social distancing due to factors such as resource constraints and high population density.	pro	In water-scarce countries like India, washing hands is either not always possible or can exacerbate its water crisis.	Some experts hold that areas with highly dense populations with high poverty should be given priority in vaccination due to the destruction that COVID-19 infections can cause in these communities (p. 15.
in water-scarce countries like india, washing hands is either not always possible or can exacerbate its water crisis.	4_1.6.1.1.1.	In water-scarce countries like India, washing hands is either not always possible or can exacerbate its water crisis.	pro	
some experts hold that areas with highly dense populations with high poverty should be given priority in vaccination due to the destruction that covid-19 infections can cause in these communities (p. 15.	4_1.6.1.1.2.	Some experts hold that areas with highly dense populations with high poverty should be given priority in vaccination due to the destruction that COVID-19 infections can cause in these communities (p. 15.	pro	
these other measures require sustained, long-term adherence to be effective, increasing the risk of infection rates spiking.	4_1.6.1.2.	These other measures require sustained, long-term adherence to be effective, increasing the risk of infection rates spiking.	pro	People are growing tired of the measures put in place to combat COVID-19. This leads to a lack of adherence and a resurgence in cases.
people are growing tired of the measures put in place to combat covid-19. this leads to a lack of adherence and a resurgence in cases.	4_1.6.1.2.1.	People are growing tired of the measures put in place to combat COVID-19. This leads to a lack of adherence and a resurgence in cases.	pro	
it is not enough to flatten the curve if we want to reduce the mortality rate and the burden on healthcare systems.	4_1.6.1.3.	It is not enough to flatten the curve if we want to reduce the mortality rate and the burden on healthcare systems.	pro	
even with perfect employment of social distancing measures, mask wearing, and personal hygiene, there is still a risk of infection without a vaccine.	4_1.6.2.	Even with perfect employment of social distancing measures, mask wearing, and personal hygiene, there is still a risk of infection without a vaccine.	pro	Two of the major vaccines have over 90% efficacy, which means that they will dramatically reduce the likelihood of infection.	Even with a vaccine, there is still a risk of infection.	The vaccines that have so far been developed are less effective against newer strains.
even with a vaccine, there is still a risk of infection.	4_1.6.2.2.	Even with a vaccine, there is still a risk of infection.	con	It could be years before everyone is immunized, and even when that happens, it is likely that there will still be people who are infected by COVID-19 and suffer the harms of infection.
it could be years before everyone is immunized, and even when that happens, it is likely that there will still be people who are infected by covid-19 and suffer the harms of infection.	4_1.6.2.2.1.	It could be years before everyone is immunized, and even when that happens, it is likely that there will still be people who are infected by COVID-19 and suffer the harms of infection.	con	According to an estimate, in the time it takes for the vaccine to reach the majority of Americans, millions of people will be infected by COVID-19.
according to an estimate, in the time it takes for the vaccine to reach the majority of americans, millions of people will be infected by covid-19.	4_1.6.2.2.1.1.	According to an estimate, in the time it takes for the vaccine to reach the majority of Americans, millions of people will be infected by COVID-19.	con	
there has not been perfect enforcement of other measures. new zealand's example proves that incidences of covid-19 spread can be virtually eliminated without a vaccine.	4_1.6.3.	There has not been perfect enforcement of other measures. New Zealand's example proves that incidences of COVID-19 spread can be virtually eliminated without a vaccine.	con	It is unlikely that New Zealand's pandemic policy can be replicated in countries with much larger COVID-19 outbreaks that have vastly different demographics.	New Zealand's ability to combat COVID-19, like Taiwan's, was in no small part to it being an island. This means that countries that border other countries may never have been able to eliminate the virus.	New Zealand, Taiwan, Singapore, Iceland and Vietnam have all registered under 35 deaths as of February 2021, showing it is possible to curb the harms of COVID-19 without a vaccine.
it is unlikely that new zealand's pandemic policy can be replicated in countries with much larger covid-19 outbreaks that have vastly different demographics.	4_1.6.3.1.	It is unlikely that New Zealand's pandemic policy can be replicated in countries with much larger COVID-19 outbreaks that have vastly different demographics.	pro	Vietnam has offered a successful example of how a populous and resource-constrained country can successfully contain the spread of COVID-19 without vaccination.
vietnam has offered a successful example of how a populous and resource-constrained country can successfully contain the spread of covid-19 without vaccination.	4_1.6.3.1.1.	Vietnam has offered a successful example of how a populous and resource-constrained country can successfully contain the spread of COVID-19 without vaccination.	con	
new zealand's ability to combat covid-19, like taiwan's, was in no small part to it being an island. this means that countries that border other countries may never have been able to eliminate the virus.	4_1.6.3.2.	New Zealand's ability to combat COVID-19, like Taiwan's, was in no small part to it being an island. This means that countries that border other countries may never have been able to eliminate the virus.	pro	
new zealand, taiwan, singapore, iceland and vietnam have all registered under 35 deaths as of february 2021, showing it is possible to curb the harms of covid-19 without a vaccine.	4_1.6.3.3.	New Zealand, Taiwan, Singapore, Iceland and Vietnam have all registered under 35 deaths as of February 2021, showing it is possible to curb the harms of COVID-19 without a vaccine.	con	
it will take a long time before most of the population can access the vaccines. we will need to continue using other measures to reduce the spread of covid-19 infections and subsequently save lives.	4_1.6.4.	It will take a long time before most of the population can access the vaccines. We will need to continue using other measures to reduce the spread of COVID-19 infections and subsequently save lives.	con	It could be years before everyone is immunized, and even when that happens, it is likely that there will still be people who are infected by COVID-19 and suffer the harms of infection.	It is projected that it will take up at least the first half of 2021 for everyone in the UK to be vaccinated.	Experts have warned that one-quarter of the world may not be vaccinated until 2022.
it is projected that it will take up at least the first half of 2021 for everyone in the uk to be vaccinated.	4_1.6.4.2.	It is projected that it will take up at least the first half of 2021 for everyone in the UK to be vaccinated.	con	
experts have warned that one-quarter of the world may not be vaccinated until 2022.	4_1.6.4.3.	Experts have warned that one-quarter of the world may not be vaccinated until 2022.	con	
medical innovations in the treatment and suppression of covid-19 symptoms make vaccinations unnecessary.	4_1.6.5.	Medical innovations in the treatment and suppression of COVID-19 symptoms make vaccinations unnecessary.	con	Several anti-viral drugs such as Remdesivir, have been found to have positive effects on the symptoms of COVID-19.	For serious COVID-19 cases, dexamethasone has been proven to reduce deaths from those on ventilators and those who needed oxygen assistance.	For the vast majority of existing treatments, it is still unknown if any have any repeatable positive effect on COVID-19 patients.	Even if treatments can help in reducing the number of serious cases, they cannot prevent infections as vaccines do.
several anti-viral drugs such as remdesivir, have been found to have positive effects on the symptoms of covid-19.	4_1.6.5.1.	Several anti-viral drugs such as Remdesivir, have been found to have positive effects on the symptoms of COVID-19.	con	
for serious covid-19 cases, dexamethasone has been proven to reduce deaths from those on ventilators and those who needed oxygen assistance.	4_1.6.5.2.	For serious COVID-19 cases, dexamethasone has been proven to reduce deaths from those on ventilators and those who needed oxygen assistance.	con	Low-cost dexamethasone has reduced death by up to one-third in patients with severe respiratory complications from COVID-19 infection.	Dexamethasone can help in reducing the mortality rate, but cannot help prevent infections. Therefore, it cannot replace vaccines in ultimately stopping the spread of infections.
low-cost dexamethasone has reduced death by up to one-third in patients with severe respiratory complications from covid-19 infection.	4_1.6.5.2.1.	Low-cost dexamethasone has reduced death by up to one-third in patients with severe respiratory complications from COVID-19 infection.	con	
dexamethasone can help in reducing the mortality rate, but cannot help prevent infections. therefore, it cannot replace vaccines in ultimately stopping the spread of infections.	4_1.6.5.2.2.	Dexamethasone can help in reducing the mortality rate, but cannot help prevent infections. Therefore, it cannot replace vaccines in ultimately stopping the spread of infections.	pro	
for the vast majority of existing treatments, it is still unknown if any have any repeatable positive effect on covid-19 patients.	4_1.6.5.3.	For the vast majority of existing treatments, it is still unknown if any have any repeatable positive effect on COVID-19 patients.	pro	
even if treatments can help in reducing the number of serious cases, they cannot prevent infections as vaccines do.	4_1.6.5.4.	Even if treatments can help in reducing the number of serious cases, they cannot prevent infections as vaccines do.	pro	Vaccines are used to prevent infection whereas treatments are usually used when people are already infected.	People will continue to suffer from the symptoms of contracting COVID-19, which can be painful.
vaccines are used to prevent infection whereas treatments are usually used when people are already infected.	4_1.6.5.4.1.	Vaccines are used to prevent infection whereas treatments are usually used when people are already infected.	pro	
people will continue to suffer from the symptoms of contracting covid-19, which can be painful.	4_1.6.5.4.2.	People will continue to suffer from the symptoms of contracting COVID-19, which can be painful.	pro	
vaccines are a proven way to stem the spread of infectious illnesses.	4_1.6.6.	Vaccines are a proven way to stem the spread of infectious illnesses.	pro	During the SARS outbreak, strong public health measures were able to sufficiently stop the spread of the virus without requiring vaccination.	Vaccines for COVID-19 will be the first licensed vaccines to use mRNA technology. Therefore, while vaccines broadly are proven to work, many COVID-19 vaccines will be based on technology that has not been proven to work on a large scale.	By 3rd February 2021, over 90% of people in Israel aged over 60 had received their first dose of the vaccine. This led to a 41% drop in confirmed COVID-19 infections in that age group and a 31% drop in hospitalization.	Vaccines have eradicated diseases in the past, like rinderpest and smallpox (p. 4.
during the sars outbreak, strong public health measures were able to sufficiently stop the spread of the virus without requiring vaccination.	4_1.6.6.1.	During the SARS outbreak, strong public health measures were able to sufficiently stop the spread of the virus without requiring vaccination.	con	COVID-19 is relatively much more infectious and deadly. This makes it harder for its spread to be curbed without vaccination.
covid-19 is relatively much more infectious and deadly. this makes it harder for its spread to be curbed without vaccination.	4_1.6.6.1.1.	COVID-19 is relatively much more infectious and deadly. This makes it harder for its spread to be curbed without vaccination.	pro	The virus that caused the SARS outbreak disappeared following public health measures, but the COVID-19 virus has spread globally despite these measures.
the virus that caused the sars outbreak disappeared following public health measures, but the covid-19 virus has spread globally despite these measures.	4_1.6.6.1.1.1.	The virus that caused the SARS outbreak disappeared following public health measures, but the COVID-19 virus has spread globally despite these measures.	pro	
vaccines for covid-19 will be the first licensed vaccines to use mrna technology. therefore, while vaccines broadly are proven to work, many covid-19 vaccines will be based on technology that has not been proven to work on a large scale.	4_1.6.6.2.	Vaccines for COVID-19 will be the first licensed vaccines to use mRNA technology. Therefore, while vaccines broadly are proven to work, many COVID-19 vaccines will be based on technology that has not been proven to work on a large scale.	con	The mRNA vaccine platform technology, used by the Pfizer/BioNTech has been in development for over two decades) vaccine, has been in development for over two decades.
the mrna vaccine platform technology, used by the pfizer/biontech has been in development for over two decades) vaccine, has been in development for over two decades.	4_1.6.6.2.1.	The mRNA vaccine platform technology, used by the Pfizer/BioNTech has been in development for over two decades) vaccine, has been in development for over two decades.	pro	Regardless, the COVID-19 vaccine is the first licensed mRNA vaccine.	mRNA technology was first developed in 1989.
regardless, the covid-19 vaccine is the first licensed mrna vaccine.	4_1.6.6.2.1.1.	Regardless, the COVID-19 vaccine is the first licensed mRNA vaccine.	con	
mrna technology was first developed in 1989.	4_1.6.6.2.1.2.	mRNA technology was first developed in 1989.	pro	
by 3rd february 2021, over 90% of people in israel aged over 60 had received their first dose of the vaccine. this led to a 41% drop in confirmed covid-19 infections in that age group and a 31% drop in hospitalization.	4_1.6.6.3.	By 3rd February 2021, over 90% of people in Israel aged over 60 had received their first dose of the vaccine. This led to a 41% drop in confirmed COVID-19 infections in that age group and a 31% drop in hospitalization.	pro	
vaccines have eradicated diseases in the past, like rinderpest and smallpox (p. 4.	4_1.6.6.4.	Vaccines have eradicated diseases in the past, like rinderpest and smallpox (p. 4.	pro	
vaccines are the least harmful way to mitigate the spread of covid-19.	4_1.6.7.	Vaccines are the least harmful way to mitigate the spread of COVID-19.	pro	Any COVID-19 vaccine produced is unlikely to undergo the level of clinical testing necessary to confirm it is both safe, and effective.	Maintaining social distancing measures long-term could have severe impacts on the global economy and exacerbate harms to marginalized communities.	Critically we just need to ensure the vaccine does not disrupt the ability to produce the next generation (via births). So then as long as we live long enough to raise that generation, then hopefully the vaccine will have done its job (we the species live on).	Vaccines can have harmful side-effects that compromise their effectiveness.
any covid-19 vaccine produced is unlikely to undergo the level of clinical testing necessary to confirm it is both safe, and effective.	4_1.6.7.1.	Any COVID-19 vaccine produced is unlikely to undergo the level of clinical testing necessary to confirm it is both safe, and effective.	con	The rush and competition to bring out a vaccination might mean that important steps in testing for safety are skipped. This leads to a higher likelihood of the vaccine having dangerous consequences.	COVID-19 vaccine development draws on a large body of existing knowledge about coronaviruses and potential vaccine side effects.	Two of the major vaccines have over 90% efficacy, which means that they will dramatically reduce the likelihood of infection.	Corners were not cut in the production of COVID-19 vaccines, and all vaccines have undergone multiple stages of trials.	On average, it can take 10-12 years to produce a safe and effective vaccine.
the rush and competition to bring out a vaccination might mean that important steps in testing for safety are skipped. this leads to a higher likelihood of the vaccine having dangerous consequences.	4_1.6.7.1.1.	The rush and competition to bring out a vaccination might mean that important steps in testing for safety are skipped. This leads to a higher likelihood of the vaccine having dangerous consequences.	con	Scientists have expressed concern about the speed with which the COVID-19 vaccine is being developed in Russia because it was not tested in sufficiently large trials.	In order to make COVID-19 vaccines as safe as possible, regulatory bodies have set high standards for human trials and require them to involve a wide range of population groups and demographics.	Several different organizations involved in vaccine development are collaborating at an unprecedented scale in order to reduce risks and increase the chances of success.	Vaccine development for COVID‑19 has resulted in compressed schedules but not a compromise on safety standards and trials.
scientists have expressed concern about the speed with which the covid-19 vaccine is being developed in russia because it was not tested in sufficiently large trials.	4_1.6.7.1.1.1.	Scientists have expressed concern about the speed with which the COVID-19 vaccine is being developed in Russia because it was not tested in sufficiently large trials.	con	According to a poll in December 2020, 59% of Russians were mistrustful of Sputnik V and unwilling to take the vaccine.	The Lancet, an international medical journal, has said that the Sputnik V vaccine appears safe and highly effective in late-stage trials.
according to a poll in december 2020, 59% of russians were mistrustful of sputnik v and unwilling to take the vaccine.	4_1.6.7.1.1.1.1.	According to a poll in December 2020, 59% of Russians were mistrustful of Sputnik V and unwilling to take the vaccine.	con	
the lancet, an international medical journal, has said that the sputnik v vaccine appears safe and highly effective in late-stage trials.	4_1.6.7.1.1.1.2.	The Lancet, an international medical journal, has said that the Sputnik V vaccine appears safe and highly effective in late-stage trials.	pro	
in order to make covid-19 vaccines as safe as possible, regulatory bodies have set high standards for human trials and require them to involve a wide range of population groups and demographics.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.	In order to make COVID-19 vaccines as safe as possible, regulatory bodies have set high standards for human trials and require them to involve a wide range of population groups and demographics.	pro	Racial minorities are not adequately represented in human trials that test the safety of COVID-19 vaccines. This exposes them to greater risks from vaccination.	Human trials did not include pregnant women, which has raised concerns about the safety of the vaccine for these women.
racial minorities are not adequately represented in human trials that test the safety of covid-19 vaccines. this exposes them to greater risks from vaccination.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.	Racial minorities are not adequately represented in human trials that test the safety of COVID-19 vaccines. This exposes them to greater risks from vaccination.	con	This is not specific to the COVID-19 vaccine. Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been underrepresented in clinical trials.	There has been a wide range of efforts to increase diversity in the clinical trials for COVID-19.	Racial minorities have been infected and harmed by COVID-19 at disproportionately higher rates. This highlights the importance of vaccines for these groups specifically.
this is not specific to the covid-19 vaccine. historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been underrepresented in clinical trials.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.1.	This is not specific to the COVID-19 vaccine. Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been underrepresented in clinical trials.	pro	
there has been a wide range of efforts to increase diversity in the clinical trials for covid-19.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.2.	There has been a wide range of efforts to increase diversity in the clinical trials for COVID-19.	pro	The FDA released recommendations for how industry and agency staff can collect race and ethnicity data in clinical trials.	The FDA strongly recommended the inclusion of racial minorities, who are disproportionately affected by the pandemic, in clinical trials (p. 11).	Moderna slowed down vaccine trials in order to ensure greater minority representation.
the fda released recommendations for how industry and agency staff can collect race and ethnicity data in clinical trials.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.2.1.	The FDA released recommendations for how industry and agency staff can collect race and ethnicity data in clinical trials.	pro	
the fda strongly recommended the inclusion of racial minorities, who are disproportionately affected by the pandemic, in clinical trials (p. 11).	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.2.2.	The FDA strongly recommended the inclusion of racial minorities, who are disproportionately affected by the pandemic, in clinical trials (p. 11).	pro	
moderna slowed down vaccine trials in order to ensure greater minority representation.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.2.3.	Moderna slowed down vaccine trials in order to ensure greater minority representation.	pro	
racial minorities have been infected and harmed by covid-19 at disproportionately higher rates. this highlights the importance of vaccines for these groups specifically.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.1.3.	Racial minorities have been infected and harmed by COVID-19 at disproportionately higher rates. This highlights the importance of vaccines for these groups specifically.	con	
human trials did not include pregnant women, which has raised concerns about the safety of the vaccine for these women.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.2.	Human trials did not include pregnant women, which has raised concerns about the safety of the vaccine for these women.	con	Due to the potential for harmful side-effects, there has been conflicting advice offered to pregnant women about whether or not they should get the COVID-19 vaccine.
due to the potential for harmful side-effects, there has been conflicting advice offered to pregnant women about whether or not they should get the covid-19 vaccine.	4_1.6.7.1.1.2.2.1.	Due to the potential for harmful side-effects, there has been conflicting advice offered to pregnant women about whether or not they should get the COVID-19 vaccine.	con	
several different organizations involved in vaccine development are collaborating at an unprecedented scale in order to reduce risks and increase the chances of success.	4_1.6.7.1.1.3.	Several different organizations involved in vaccine development are collaborating at an unprecedented scale in order to reduce risks and increase the chances of success.	pro	
vaccine development for covid‑19 has resulted in compressed schedules but not a compromise on safety standards and trials.	4_1.6.7.1.1.4.	Vaccine development for COVID‑19 has resulted in compressed schedules but not a compromise on safety standards and trials.	pro	
covid-19 vaccine development draws on a large body of existing knowledge about coronaviruses and potential vaccine side effects.	4_1.6.7.1.2.	COVID-19 vaccine development draws on a large body of existing knowledge about coronaviruses and potential vaccine side effects.	pro	Prior knowledge of the role played by the spike protein in coronavirus pathogenesis helped us understand the mode of infection employed by SARS-CoV-2.
prior knowledge of the role played by the spike protein in coronavirus pathogenesis helped us understand the mode of infection employed by sars-cov-2.	4_1.6.7.1.2.1.	Prior knowledge of the role played by the spike protein in coronavirus pathogenesis helped us understand the mode of infection employed by SARS-CoV-2.	pro	
corners were not cut in the production of covid-19 vaccines, and all vaccines have undergone multiple stages of trials.	4_1.6.7.1.4.	Corners were not cut in the production of COVID-19 vaccines, and all vaccines have undergone multiple stages of trials.	pro	
on average, it can take 10-12 years to produce a safe and effective vaccine.	4_1.6.7.1.5.	On average, it can take 10-12 years to produce a safe and effective vaccine.	con	The MMR vaccine, which was developed in record time and drew on the groundwork established during WWII, still took four years to develop.	COVID-19 vaccines are the subject of an international effort to develop vaccines, with more resources behind it than most vaccines would see.
the mmr vaccine, which was developed in record time and drew on the groundwork established during wwii, still took four years to develop.	4_1.6.7.1.5.1.	The MMR vaccine, which was developed in record time and drew on the groundwork established during WWII, still took four years to develop.	con	The MMR vaccine was produced with fewer resources, less technology, and less global cooperation than current efforts to produce a COVID-19 vaccine.
the mmr vaccine was produced with fewer resources, less technology, and less global cooperation than current efforts to produce a covid-19 vaccine.	4_1.6.7.1.5.1.1.	The MMR vaccine was produced with fewer resources, less technology, and less global cooperation than current efforts to produce a COVID-19 vaccine.	pro	
covid-19 vaccines are the subject of an international effort to develop vaccines, with more resources behind it than most vaccines would see.	4_1.6.7.1.5.2.	COVID-19 vaccines are the subject of an international effort to develop vaccines, with more resources behind it than most vaccines would see.	pro	
maintaining social distancing measures long-term could have severe impacts on the global economy and exacerbate harms to marginalized communities.	4_1.6.7.2.	Maintaining social distancing measures long-term could have severe impacts on the global economy and exacerbate harms to marginalized communities.	pro	Distancing and stay-at-home measures increase the risk of intimate partner violence and child abuse.	Until there is complete herd immunity to COVID-19, some degree of social distancing will have to occur.	Technology and social innovations can help mitigate the harms of social distancing.	Social distancing measures have an especially devastating impact on lives and livelihoods in developing countries.
distancing and stay-at-home measures increase the risk of intimate partner violence and child abuse.	4_1.6.7.2.1.	Distancing and stay-at-home measures increase the risk of intimate partner violence and child abuse.	pro	
until there is complete herd immunity to covid-19, some degree of social distancing will have to occur.	4_1.6.7.2.2.	Until there is complete herd immunity to COVID-19, some degree of social distancing will have to occur.	con	Attempting to achieve herd immunity without vaccines is unethical, as this would entail allowing million to get infected with COVID-19 and thousands to die.	Achieving herd immunity to COVID-19 without a vaccine would be incredibly difficult, and so mandatory vaccination is the quickest way out of mandatory social distancing.
attempting to achieve herd immunity without vaccines is unethical, as this would entail allowing million to get infected with covid-19 and thousands to die.	4_1.6.7.2.2.1.	Attempting to achieve herd immunity without vaccines is unethical, as this would entail allowing million to get infected with COVID-19 and thousands to die.	pro	
achieving herd immunity to covid-19 without a vaccine would be incredibly difficult, and so mandatory vaccination is the quickest way out of mandatory social distancing.	4_1.6.7.2.2.2.	Achieving herd immunity to COVID-19 without a vaccine would be incredibly difficult, and so mandatory vaccination is the quickest way out of mandatory social distancing.	pro	
technology and social innovations can help mitigate the harms of social distancing.	4_1.6.7.2.3.	Technology and social innovations can help mitigate the harms of social distancing.	con	Due to a lack of resources, it is very difficult to implement technological solutions such as virtual education in poor countries. (pg. 12)
due to a lack of resources, it is very difficult to implement technological solutions such as virtual education in poor countries. (pg. 12)	4_1.6.7.2.3.1.	Due to a lack of resources, it is very difficult to implement technological solutions such as virtual education in poor countries. (pg. 12)	pro	
social distancing measures have an especially devastating impact on lives and livelihoods in developing countries.	4_1.6.7.2.4.	Social distancing measures have an especially devastating impact on lives and livelihoods in developing countries.	pro	
critically we just need to ensure the vaccine does not disrupt the ability to produce the next generation (via births). so then as long as we live long enough to raise that generation, then hopefully the vaccine will have done its job (we the species live on).	4_1.6.7.3.	Critically we just need to ensure the vaccine does not disrupt the ability to produce the next generation (via births). So then as long as we live long enough to raise that generation, then hopefully the vaccine will have done its job (we the species live on).	pro	
vaccines can have harmful side-effects that compromise their effectiveness.	4_1.6.7.4.	Vaccines can have harmful side-effects that compromise their effectiveness.	con	Any potential long-term side effects of the vaccine may not become apparent for many years.	Severe allergic reactions to the COVID-19 vaccine have been documented.	Due to the potential for harmful side-effects, there has been conflicting advice offered to pregnant women about whether or not they should get the COVID-19 vaccine.	The CDC has found that the benefit of vaccines outweighs any potential side-effects.
any potential long-term side effects of the vaccine may not become apparent for many years.	4_1.6.7.4.1.	Any potential long-term side effects of the vaccine may not become apparent for many years.	con	Most side-effects appear very quickly, and so it is unlikely that there will be a large amount of people who experience long-term side effects.
most side-effects appear very quickly, and so it is unlikely that there will be a large amount of people who experience long-term side effects.	4_1.6.7.4.1.1.	Most side-effects appear very quickly, and so it is unlikely that there will be a large amount of people who experience long-term side effects.	pro	
severe allergic reactions to the covid-19 vaccine have been documented.	4_1.6.7.4.2.	Severe allergic reactions to the COVID-19 vaccine have been documented.	con	Immediate allergic reactions, which are not severe but can cause swelling, hives, and wheezing, have been documented in individuals who received the COVID-19 vaccine.	The symptoms of these allergic reactions were promptly treated.
immediate allergic reactions, which are not severe but can cause swelling, hives, and wheezing, have been documented in individuals who received the covid-19 vaccine.	4_1.6.7.4.2.1.	Immediate allergic reactions, which are not severe but can cause swelling, hives, and wheezing, have been documented in individuals who received the COVID-19 vaccine.	con	Allergic reactions can occur as a response to other vaccines too, such as the MMR vaccine, which has been made effectively mandatory in some places.
allergic reactions can occur as a response to other vaccines too, such as the mmr vaccine, which has been made effectively mandatory in some places.	4_1.6.7.4.2.1.1.	Allergic reactions can occur as a response to other vaccines too, such as the MMR vaccine, which has been made effectively mandatory in some places.	pro	
the symptoms of these allergic reactions were promptly treated.	4_1.6.7.4.2.2.	The symptoms of these allergic reactions were promptly treated.	pro	
the cdc has found that the benefit of vaccines outweighs any potential side-effects.	4_1.6.7.4.4.	The CDC has found that the benefit of vaccines outweighs any potential side-effects.	pro	
vaccinations should be mandatory.	5_1.	Vaccinations should be mandatory.	pro	Making vaccines mandatory will prevent any epidemics from occurring due to lack of adherence to vaccination programmes or public opinion shifting (e.g. Anti-Vax movement).	Vaccination program saves money because preventing the desease is less expensive than curing it \WHO\]. Thus, it reduces social assistance expenses.	Vaccination should never be mandatory since no vaccine is 100% safe nor 100% effective.	Even assuming that vaccines are a good thing, fines are not the right way to encourage/ enforce this health practice.	Substantial population growth caused by vaccines may have a negative impact on the environment.	Vaccines have (potentially life-threatening) side effects.	Medical institutions and regulatory bodies should not be trusted with a mandatory vaccination policy.	Parents choosing not to vaccinate their children is child neglect, and the government should intervene to prevent this.	Vaccination programmes rely on herd-immunity to be effective.	Mandatory vaccines would infringe upon individuals' human rights.	Vaccines should only be mandatory if they are also free, otherwise this places an unjust burden on low-income families which essentially punishes parents for being poor.	Evidence suggests vaccines are an effective means of protecting people from disease.
making vaccines mandatory will prevent any epidemics from occurring due to lack of adherence to vaccination programmes or public opinion shifting (e.g. anti-vax movement).	5_1.1.	Making vaccines mandatory will prevent any epidemics from occurring due to lack of adherence to vaccination programmes or public opinion shifting (e.g. Anti-Vax movement).	pro	Human history proves that there are no diseases that most human beings would willingly avoid preventing; making mandatory vaccinations unnecessary.	In the Netherlands, measles returned in a community with low vaccine uptake.
human history proves that there are no diseases that most human beings would willingly avoid preventing; making mandatory vaccinations unnecessary.	5_1.1.1.	Human history proves that there are no diseases that most human beings would willingly avoid preventing; making mandatory vaccinations unnecessary.	con	
in the netherlands, measles returned in a community with low vaccine uptake.	5_1.1.2.	In the Netherlands, measles returned in a community with low vaccine uptake.	pro	Measles outbreaks also can and do occur in highly vaccinated populations.
measles outbreaks also can and do occur in highly vaccinated populations.	5_1.1.2.1.	Measles outbreaks also can and do occur in highly vaccinated populations.	con	Outbreaks of contagious disease are much more limited among highly-vaccinated populations (3.8% infection rate of students in the example above, vs. 88% infection rate among unimmunized kids in the grandparent claim) This is an excellent example of how vaccines work.	The example above was prior to the (1987) recommendation of a two-shot series for MMR immunization. Rates of measles spread are decreased in the US (see fig. 2) since that change.
outbreaks of contagious disease are much more limited among highly-vaccinated populations (3.8% infection rate of students in the example above, vs. 88% infection rate among unimmunized kids in the grandparent claim) this is an excellent example of how vaccines work.	5_1.1.2.1.1.	Outbreaks of contagious disease are much more limited among highly-vaccinated populations (3.8% infection rate of students in the example above, vs. 88% infection rate among unimmunized kids in the grandparent claim) This is an excellent example of how vaccines work.	pro	
the example above was prior to the (1987) recommendation of a two-shot series for mmr immunization. rates of measles spread are decreased in the us (see fig. 2) since that change.	5_1.1.2.1.2.	The example above was prior to the (1987) recommendation of a two-shot series for MMR immunization. Rates of measles spread are decreased in the US (see fig. 2) since that change.	pro	
vaccination program saves money because preventing the desease is less expensive than curing it \who\]. thus, it reduces social assistance expenses.	5_1.2.	Vaccination program saves money because preventing the desease is less expensive than curing it \WHO\]. Thus, it reduces social assistance expenses.	pro	
vaccination should never be mandatory since no vaccine is 100% safe nor 100% effective.	5_1.3.	Vaccination should never be mandatory since no vaccine is 100% safe nor 100% effective.	con	Many mandatory safety measures---like the requirement to have smoke detectors or fire exits in buildings---are not 100% effective in preventing harm.
many mandatory safety measures---like the requirement to have smoke detectors or fire exits in buildings---are not 100% effective in preventing harm.	5_1.3.1.	Many mandatory safety measures---like the requirement to have smoke detectors or fire exits in buildings---are not 100% effective in preventing harm.	pro	
even assuming that vaccines are a good thing, fines are not the right way to encourage/ enforce this health practice.	5_1.4.	Even assuming that vaccines are a good thing, fines are not the right way to encourage/ enforce this health practice.	con	Fear of dying is a far more useful tool here to persuade adults to take vaccines than is compulsion.	Human history proves that there are no diseases that most human beings would willingly avoid preventing; making mandatory vaccinations unnecessary.	Enforcing vaccination will antagonize parents against governments and pharmaceutical companies and will lead to a more reduced amount of vaccinated children.
fear of dying is a far more useful tool here to persuade adults to take vaccines than is compulsion.	5_1.4.1.	Fear of dying is a far more useful tool here to persuade adults to take vaccines than is compulsion.	con	
enforcing vaccination will antagonize parents against governments and pharmaceutical companies and will lead to a more reduced amount of vaccinated children.	5_1.4.3.	Enforcing vaccination will antagonize parents against governments and pharmaceutical companies and will lead to a more reduced amount of vaccinated children.	con	It is the responsibility of every government to inform the public and relieve society from such pressures.	Offering free vaccines will defuse any talk of for-profit motivation behind immunization.
it is the responsibility of every government to inform the public and relieve society from such pressures.	5_1.4.3.1.	It is the responsibility of every government to inform the public and relieve society from such pressures.	pro	
offering free vaccines will defuse any talk of for-profit motivation behind immunization.	5_1.4.3.2.	Offering free vaccines will defuse any talk of for-profit motivation behind immunization.	pro	It will work only if the pharmaceutical industry offer them, not if they are paid by the state with taxpayer's money.
it will work only if the pharmaceutical industry offer them, not if they are paid by the state with taxpayer's money.	5_1.4.3.2.1.	It will work only if the pharmaceutical industry offer them, not if they are paid by the state with taxpayer's money.	con	
substantial population growth caused by vaccines may have a negative impact on the environment.	5_1.5.	Substantial population growth caused by vaccines may have a negative impact on the environment.	con	Since the first vaccine was developed in 1796, a huge number of diseases have become preventable through vaccinations.	One of the causes of human overpopulation has been the decline in human death rates. Vaccinations have had a huge effect in reducing these rates, and increasing human population.	Young children, older people and people with compromised immune systems should not be considered collateral damage in the fight against climate change.	There are many ways to incentivize reduced population growth without causing widespread death of existing populations.
since the first vaccine was developed in 1796, a huge number of diseases have become preventable through vaccinations.	5_1.5.1.	Since the first vaccine was developed in 1796, a huge number of diseases have become preventable through vaccinations.	con	
one of the causes of human overpopulation has been the decline in human death rates. vaccinations have had a huge effect in reducing these rates, and increasing human population.	5_1.5.2.	One of the causes of human overpopulation has been the decline in human death rates. Vaccinations have had a huge effect in reducing these rates, and increasing human population.	con	Vaccines are reported to avoid 2-3 million deaths per year.
vaccines are reported to avoid 2-3 million deaths per year.	5_1.5.2.1.	Vaccines are reported to avoid 2-3 million deaths per year.	con	
young children, older people and people with compromised immune systems should not be considered collateral damage in the fight against climate change.	5_1.5.3.	Young children, older people and people with compromised immune systems should not be considered collateral damage in the fight against climate change.	pro	
there are many ways to incentivize reduced population growth without causing widespread death of existing populations.	5_1.5.4.	There are many ways to incentivize reduced population growth without causing widespread death of existing populations.	pro	
vaccines have (potentially life-threatening) side effects.	5_1.6.	Vaccines have (potentially life-threatening) side effects.	con	Vaccines can lead to vaccine-derived polio virus, which can paralyse people.	Unvaccinated mothers exposed to an illness in childhood developed a robust, permanent immunity they were able to pass on to their infants via antibodies in breastmilk. Today, thanks to mass vaccination, infants are at greater risk in the event of an outbreak since their vaccinated mothers aren't as well able to protect them.	Vaccines are painful.	While vaccines have some very minimal side effects they are completely swamped by the reduction in mortality and morbidity from the vaccines.	Vaccines have been linked to autism.	Vaccines carry risk, and some children may be genetically predisposed to vaccine injury.	The extremely negative side effects of vaccination shown on media have no scientific basis	Vaccine Exemptions for medical reasons exist.	Hundreds of deaths each year are linked to vaccines.	Diseases that are preventable with vaccination, like polio, also have disastrous effects on people's lives.
vaccines can lead to vaccine-derived polio virus, which can paralyse people.	5_1.6.1.	Vaccines can lead to vaccine-derived polio virus, which can paralyse people.	con	Vaccine-derived polio-virus is extremely rare: there is a chance of 0.000043% vaccine-associated polio.
vaccine-derived polio-virus is extremely rare: there is a chance of 0.000043% vaccine-associated polio.	5_1.6.1.1.	Vaccine-derived polio-virus is extremely rare: there is a chance of 0.000043% vaccine-associated polio.	pro	In India, there was a huge increase in non-polio acute flaccid paralysis(NPAFP) cases in 2011, with an extra 47,500 new cases of NPAFP.
in india, there was a huge increase in non-polio acute flaccid paralysis(npafp) cases in 2011, with an extra 47,500 new cases of npafp.	5_1.6.1.1.1.	In India, there was a huge increase in non-polio acute flaccid paralysis(NPAFP) cases in 2011, with an extra 47,500 new cases of NPAFP.	con	
unvaccinated mothers exposed to an illness in childhood developed a robust, permanent immunity they were able to pass on to their infants via antibodies in breastmilk. today, thanks to mass vaccination, infants are at greater risk in the event of an outbreak since their vaccinated mothers aren't as well able to protect them.	5_1.6.2.	Unvaccinated mothers exposed to an illness in childhood developed a robust, permanent immunity they were able to pass on to their infants via antibodies in breastmilk. Today, thanks to mass vaccination, infants are at greater risk in the event of an outbreak since their vaccinated mothers aren't as well able to protect them.	con	The risk of infants not getting passive immunity in breast milk, is acceptable when the disease in question has been eliminated by an effective vaccine.
the risk of infants not getting passive immunity in breast milk, is acceptable when the disease in question has been eliminated by an effective vaccine.	5_1.6.2.1.	The risk of infants not getting passive immunity in breast milk, is acceptable when the disease in question has been eliminated by an effective vaccine.	pro	
vaccines are painful.	5_1.6.3.	Vaccines are painful.	con	Vaccines are less painful than dying of vaccine-preventable diseases.
vaccines are less painful than dying of vaccine-preventable diseases.	5_1.6.3.1.	Vaccines are less painful than dying of vaccine-preventable diseases.	pro	
while vaccines have some very minimal side effects they are completely swamped by the reduction in mortality and morbidity from the vaccines.	5_1.6.4.	While vaccines have some very minimal side effects they are completely swamped by the reduction in mortality and morbidity from the vaccines.	pro	Billions of doses over decades with incredibly tight surveillance have shown that the effects are really good and the side effects are very minimal.
billions of doses over decades with incredibly tight surveillance have shown that the effects are really good and the side effects are very minimal.	5_1.6.4.1.	Billions of doses over decades with incredibly tight surveillance have shown that the effects are really good and the side effects are very minimal.	pro	If it were not a net positive it wouldn't be continued.
if it were not a net positive it wouldn't be continued.	5_1.6.4.1.1.	If it were not a net positive it wouldn't be continued.	pro	
vaccines have been linked to autism.	5_1.6.5.	Vaccines have been linked to autism.	con	There is no actual evidence to support the claim that vaccinations and autism are linked.	In 1998, Andrew Wakefield authored a paper claiming the link.	Robert Kennedy Jr published an article proposing that thimerosal-containing vaccines caused autism.	There have been many proper studies ever since proving that there's no link between vaccines and autism.	Even if vaccines did cause autism - which they don't - dying of a vaccine-preventable disease is surely much worse than having autism.	This is a terrible misconception. The only study that created a link to this is known to be fraudulent, being paid for by pharmaceutics companies who didn't want people to be vaccinated. This is just one of many articles that show that vaccines do NOT have any relation with autism.
there is no actual evidence to support the claim that vaccinations and autism are linked.	5_1.6.5.1.	There is no actual evidence to support the claim that vaccinations and autism are linked.	pro	In a hearing of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, Congressman Posey questioned officials from the CDC who admitted that they had not studied vaccinated vs unvaccinated subjects before approving vaccines for public distribution. See video at 2:20: youtube.com	A new study links aluminium in the brain to Autism. Denmark will confirm this study with a large group of people soon. Aluminium is in more then half the vaccines given to children. sciencedirect.com  This will be the biggest scandal in history when vaccines are proven to cause Autism which is 1 in 28 boys in the USA.	False. There is a great deal of evidence that vaccines can cause autism. For starters, the acknowledgment of CDC director Julie Gerberding, who admitted that vaccines can cause brain damage leading to symptoms of autism. The specific case she was talking about was a girl who developed autism after receiving multiple vaccines at once and whose family was awarded compensation for it under the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.transcripts.cnn.com
in a hearing of the house government reform and oversight committee, congressman posey questioned officials from the cdc who admitted that they had not studied vaccinated vs unvaccinated subjects before approving vaccines for public distribution. see video at 2:20: youtube.com	5_1.6.5.1.1.	In a hearing of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, Congressman Posey questioned officials from the CDC who admitted that they had not studied vaccinated vs unvaccinated subjects before approving vaccines for public distribution. See video at 2:20: youtube.com	con	That would not be an appropriate method to study vaccine risks. It would be extremely expensive. It would unethically risk the population that would be at risk of the disease prevented by the vaccination.
that would not be an appropriate method to study vaccine risks. it would be extremely expensive. it would unethically risk the population that would be at risk of the disease prevented by the vaccination.	5_1.6.5.1.1.1.	That would not be an appropriate method to study vaccine risks. It would be extremely expensive. It would unethically risk the population that would be at risk of the disease prevented by the vaccination.	pro	
a new study links aluminium in the brain to autism. denmark will confirm this study with a large group of people soon. aluminium is in more then half the vaccines given to children. sciencedirect.com  this will be the biggest scandal in history when vaccines are proven to cause autism which is 1 in 28 boys in the usa.	5_1.6.5.1.2.	A new study links aluminium in the brain to Autism. Denmark will confirm this study with a large group of people soon. Aluminium is in more then half the vaccines given to children. sciencedirect.com  This will be the biggest scandal in history when vaccines are proven to cause Autism which is 1 in 28 boys in the USA.	con	
false. there is a great deal of evidence that vaccines can cause autism. for starters, the acknowledgment of cdc director julie gerberding, who admitted that vaccines can cause brain damage leading to symptoms of autism. the specific case she was talking about was a girl who developed autism after receiving multiple vaccines at once and whose family was awarded compensation for it under the national vaccine injury compensation program.transcripts.cnn.com	5_1.6.5.1.3.	False. There is a great deal of evidence that vaccines can cause autism. For starters, the acknowledgment of CDC director Julie Gerberding, who admitted that vaccines can cause brain damage leading to symptoms of autism. The specific case she was talking about was a girl who developed autism after receiving multiple vaccines at once and whose family was awarded compensation for it under the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.transcripts.cnn.com	con	The NVIC is designed with a low burden of proof because the vaccine programs are mandatory. Getting an award from the vaccine courts is nothing like proof that vaccines caused your injury.	"After a thorough review, DVIC has concluded that compensation is appropriate in this case. In sum, DVIC has concluded that the facts of this case meet the statutory criteria for demonstrating that the vaccinations CHILD received on July 19, 2000, significantly aggravated an underlying mitochondrial disorder, which predisposed her to deficits in cellular energy metabolism, and manifested as a regressive encephalopathy with features of autism spectrum disorder."huffingtonpost.com
the nvic is designed with a low burden of proof because the vaccine programs are mandatory. getting an award from the vaccine courts is nothing like proof that vaccines caused your injury.	5_1.6.5.1.3.1.	The NVIC is designed with a low burden of proof because the vaccine programs are mandatory. Getting an award from the vaccine courts is nothing like proof that vaccines caused your injury.	pro	"After a thorough review, DVIC has concluded that compensation is appropriate in this case. In sum, DVIC has concluded that the facts of this case meet the statutory criteria for demonstrating that the vaccinations CHILD received on July 19, 2000, significantly aggravated an underlying mitochondrial disorder, which predisposed her to deficits in cellular energy metabolism, and manifested as a regressive encephalopathy with features of autism spectrum disorder."huffingtonpost.com
"after a thorough review, dvic has concluded that compensation is appropriate in this case. in sum, dvic has concluded that the facts of this case meet the statutory criteria for demonstrating that the vaccinations child received on july 19, 2000, significantly aggravated an underlying mitochondrial disorder, which predisposed her to deficits in cellular energy metabolism, and manifested as a regressive encephalopathy with features of autism spectrum disorder."huffingtonpost.com	5_1.6.5.1.3.1.1.	"After a thorough review, DVIC has concluded that compensation is appropriate in this case. In sum, DVIC has concluded that the facts of this case meet the statutory criteria for demonstrating that the vaccinations CHILD received on July 19, 2000, significantly aggravated an underlying mitochondrial disorder, which predisposed her to deficits in cellular energy metabolism, and manifested as a regressive encephalopathy with features of autism spectrum disorder."huffingtonpost.com	con	The key words in this sentence being "underlying mitochondrial disorder" - this case is not representative of the vast majority of the population.
the key words in this sentence being "underlying mitochondrial disorder" - this case is not representative of the vast majority of the population.	5_1.6.5.1.3.1.1.1.	The key words in this sentence being "underlying mitochondrial disorder" - this case is not representative of the vast majority of the population.	pro	
in 1998, andrew wakefield authored a paper claiming the link.	5_1.6.5.2.	In 1998, Andrew Wakefield authored a paper claiming the link.	con	Andrew Wakefield's 1998 paper on MMR vaccine and autism was deemed fraudulent, based on the work of investigative reporter Brian Deer.	The Wakefield, et al, paper did not claim to have found an association between the MMR and autism. It only observed parents were making that association and hypothesized the link.	The "research" only included 12 subjects and was poorly run. A very brief summary can be found here.	Andrew Wakefield was subsequently stripped of his medical license as a direct result of the 1998 paper.	The Lancet, who published the paper, later retracted it.
andrew wakefield's 1998 paper on mmr vaccine and autism was deemed fraudulent, based on the work of investigative reporter brian deer.	5_1.6.5.2.1.	Andrew Wakefield's 1998 paper on MMR vaccine and autism was deemed fraudulent, based on the work of investigative reporter Brian Deer.	pro	
the wakefield, et al, paper did not claim to have found an association between the mmr and autism. it only observed parents were making that association and hypothesized the link.	5_1.6.5.2.2.	The Wakefield, et al, paper did not claim to have found an association between the MMR and autism. It only observed parents were making that association and hypothesized the link.	pro	They called for more research and emphasized, "We did not prove an association between measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine and the syndrome described (p. 641).
they called for more research and emphasized, "we did not prove an association between measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine and the syndrome described (p. 641).	5_1.6.5.2.2.1.	They called for more research and emphasized, "We did not prove an association between measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine and the syndrome described (p. 641).	pro	
the "research" only included 12 subjects and was poorly run. a very brief summary can be found here.	5_1.6.5.2.3.	The "research" only included 12 subjects and was poorly run. A very brief summary can be found here.	pro	
andrew wakefield was subsequently stripped of his medical license as a direct result of the 1998 paper.	5_1.6.5.2.4.	Andrew Wakefield was subsequently stripped of his medical license as a direct result of the 1998 paper.	pro	Wakefield's co-author John Walker-Smith was also stripped of his medical license due to the study, but he appealed the decision and won in court in 2013. He had just as much input into the study and was found to have done nothing wrong.
wakefield's co-author john walker-smith was also stripped of his medical license due to the study, but he appealed the decision and won in court in 2013. he had just as much input into the study and was found to have done nothing wrong.	5_1.6.5.2.4.1.	Wakefield's co-author John Walker-Smith was also stripped of his medical license due to the study, but he appealed the decision and won in court in 2013. He had just as much input into the study and was found to have done nothing wrong.	con	The article cited ends with: "As Mr Justice Mitting observed in his judgement, 'There is now no respectable body of opinion which supports (Dr Wakefield's) hypothesis, that MMR vaccine and autism/enterocolitis are causally linked'.
the article cited ends with: "as mr justice mitting observed in his judgement, 'there is now no respectable body of opinion which supports (dr wakefield's) hypothesis, that mmr vaccine and autism/enterocolitis are causally linked'.	5_1.6.5.2.4.1.1.	The article cited ends with: "As Mr Justice Mitting observed in his judgement, 'There is now no respectable body of opinion which supports (Dr Wakefield's) hypothesis, that MMR vaccine and autism/enterocolitis are causally linked'.	pro	
the lancet, who published the paper, later retracted it.	5_1.6.5.2.5.	The Lancet, who published the paper, later retracted it.	pro	
robert kennedy jr published an article proposing that thimerosal-containing vaccines caused autism.	5_1.6.5.3.	Robert Kennedy Jr published an article proposing that thimerosal-containing vaccines caused autism.	con	Robert Kennedy Jr, referenced in this claim, is known for stretching the truth and as such should not be seen as a reliable source.	Kennedy's work on vaccines and autism included 5 factual errors, which the magazine it was published in had to correct, before retracting the article completely.
robert kennedy jr, referenced in this claim, is known for stretching the truth and as such should not be seen as a reliable source.	5_1.6.5.3.1.	Robert Kennedy Jr, referenced in this claim, is known for stretching the truth and as such should not be seen as a reliable source.	pro	When someone has a history of lying one can discount the truth value of their future statements.
when someone has a history of lying one can discount the truth value of their future statements.	5_1.6.5.3.1.1.	When someone has a history of lying one can discount the truth value of their future statements.	pro	
kennedy's work on vaccines and autism included 5 factual errors, which the magazine it was published in had to correct, before retracting the article completely.	5_1.6.5.3.2.	Kennedy's work on vaccines and autism included 5 factual errors, which the magazine it was published in had to correct, before retracting the article completely.	pro	
there have been many proper studies ever since proving that there's no link between vaccines and autism.	5_1.6.5.4.	There have been many proper studies ever since proving that there's no link between vaccines and autism.	pro	A meta-analysis of studies on the relationship between vaccines and autism concluded that there is no link between the two.
a meta-analysis of studies on the relationship between vaccines and autism concluded that there is no link between the two.	5_1.6.5.4.1.	A meta-analysis of studies on the relationship between vaccines and autism concluded that there is no link between the two.	pro	
even if vaccines did cause autism - which they don't - dying of a vaccine-preventable disease is surely much worse than having autism.	5_1.6.5.5.	Even if vaccines did cause autism - which they don't - dying of a vaccine-preventable disease is surely much worse than having autism.	pro	Many people with autism can live happy and productive lives. Often what prevents this is not the fact they have autism, but the social barriers discriminating against them. If anti-vaxxers really cared about autism, they would work towards removing these barriers.
many people with autism can live happy and productive lives. often what prevents this is not the fact they have autism, but the social barriers discriminating against them. if anti-vaxxers really cared about autism, they would work towards removing these barriers.	5_1.6.5.5.1.	Many people with autism can live happy and productive lives. Often what prevents this is not the fact they have autism, but the social barriers discriminating against them. If anti-vaxxers really cared about autism, they would work towards removing these barriers.	pro	
this is a terrible misconception. the only study that created a link to this is known to be fraudulent, being paid for by pharmaceutics companies who didn't want people to be vaccinated. this is just one of many articles that show that vaccines do not have any relation with autism.	5_1.6.5.6.	This is a terrible misconception. The only study that created a link to this is known to be fraudulent, being paid for by pharmaceutics companies who didn't want people to be vaccinated. This is just one of many articles that show that vaccines do NOT have any relation with autism.	pro	
vaccines carry risk, and some children may be genetically predisposed to vaccine injury.	5_1.6.6.	Vaccines carry risk, and some children may be genetically predisposed to vaccine injury.	con	There is no evidence that we can sort children into "likely to be damaged by vaccines" and "unlikely to be damaged by vaccines" groups to a greater extent than we currently recommend some children not get vaccinated.	The idea that some children must be sacrificed to hypothetically protect other children is barbaric.
there is no evidence that we can sort children into "likely to be damaged by vaccines" and "unlikely to be damaged by vaccines" groups to a greater extent than we currently recommend some children not get vaccinated.	5_1.6.6.1.	There is no evidence that we can sort children into "likely to be damaged by vaccines" and "unlikely to be damaged by vaccines" groups to a greater extent than we currently recommend some children not get vaccinated.	pro	
the idea that some children must be sacrificed to hypothetically protect other children is barbaric.	5_1.6.6.2.	The idea that some children must be sacrificed to hypothetically protect other children is barbaric.	con	Herd immunity protects people who cannot have vaccinations by preventing those who can be vaccinated from carrying harmful diseases. Therefore, herd immunity is at its strongest when vaccinations are mandatory.
herd immunity protects people who cannot have vaccinations by preventing those who can be vaccinated from carrying harmful diseases. therefore, herd immunity is at its strongest when vaccinations are mandatory.	5_1.6.6.2.1.	Herd immunity protects people who cannot have vaccinations by preventing those who can be vaccinated from carrying harmful diseases. Therefore, herd immunity is at its strongest when vaccinations are mandatory.	pro	As long as a sufficiently large percentage of the population is immune, newborn infants are protected by herd immunity.	The immunocompromised are protected by herd immunity.
as long as a sufficiently large percentage of the population is immune, newborn infants are protected by herd immunity.	5_1.6.6.2.1.1.	As long as a sufficiently large percentage of the population is immune, newborn infants are protected by herd immunity.	pro	Only as long as the herd immunity is maintained. If a sufficiently large percentage of the population are no longer immune over time, the herd immunity breaks down.	Newborns are more effectively protected by natural herd immunity than by vaccine "herd immunity".
only as long as the herd immunity is maintained. if a sufficiently large percentage of the population are no longer immune over time, the herd immunity breaks down.	5_1.6.6.2.1.1.1.	Only as long as the herd immunity is maintained. If a sufficiently large percentage of the population are no longer immune over time, the herd immunity breaks down.	con	
newborns are more effectively protected by natural herd immunity than by vaccine "herd immunity".	5_1.6.6.2.1.1.2.	Newborns are more effectively protected by natural herd immunity than by vaccine "herd immunity".	con	There's no evidence that vaccine immunity is less strong than natural immunity. With vaccine immunity we actually reduce the circulating strains of a virus thus we frequently need ten year or thereabouts boosters.  This means that anti vaxxers claim that natural immunity is better than vaccine granted immunity.	Waning immunity with the measles vaccine is a recognized problem, whereas natural infection prior to 1957 is considered by the CDC as evidence of immunity because natural immunity is known to confer a more robust, longer-lasting immunity.
there's no evidence that vaccine immunity is less strong than natural immunity. with vaccine immunity we actually reduce the circulating strains of a virus thus we frequently need ten year or thereabouts boosters.  this means that anti vaxxers claim that natural immunity is better than vaccine granted immunity.	5_1.6.6.2.1.1.2.1.	There's no evidence that vaccine immunity is less strong than natural immunity. With vaccine immunity we actually reduce the circulating strains of a virus thus we frequently need ten year or thereabouts boosters.  This means that anti vaxxers claim that natural immunity is better than vaccine granted immunity.	pro	
waning immunity with the measles vaccine is a recognized problem, whereas natural infection prior to 1957 is considered by the cdc as evidence of immunity because natural immunity is known to confer a more robust, longer-lasting immunity.	5_1.6.6.2.1.1.2.2.	Waning immunity with the measles vaccine is a recognized problem, whereas natural infection prior to 1957 is considered by the CDC as evidence of immunity because natural immunity is known to confer a more robust, longer-lasting immunity.	con	
the immunocompromised are protected by herd immunity.	5_1.6.6.2.1.2.	The immunocompromised are protected by herd immunity.	pro	
the extremely negative side effects of vaccination shown on media have no scientific basis	5_1.6.7.	The extremely negative side effects of vaccination shown on media have no scientific basis	pro	
vaccine exemptions for medical reasons exist.	5_1.6.8.	Vaccine Exemptions for medical reasons exist.	pro	Medical exemptions are limited and don't include genetic predisposition.
medical exemptions are limited and don't include genetic predisposition.	5_1.6.8.1.	Medical exemptions are limited and don't include genetic predisposition.	con	
hundreds of deaths each year are linked to vaccines.	5_1.6.9.	Hundreds of deaths each year are linked to vaccines.	con	Though some die from complications arising from vaccination, the numbers are not substantial and magnitudes less than the tens of millions of lives saved by mandatory vaccination programs.	If there is any possibility of something resulting in death, then it should not be the place of the government to force people to do it. Individuals should be able to consider the risks and decide for themselves.	One study observed a correlation between infant mortality rate and number of vaccines given to infants, among 34 developed countries
though some die from complications arising from vaccination, the numbers are not substantial and magnitudes less than the tens of millions of lives saved by mandatory vaccination programs.	5_1.6.9.1.	Though some die from complications arising from vaccination, the numbers are not substantial and magnitudes less than the tens of millions of lives saved by mandatory vaccination programs.	pro	
if there is any possibility of something resulting in death, then it should not be the place of the government to force people to do it. individuals should be able to consider the risks and decide for themselves.	5_1.6.9.2.	If there is any possibility of something resulting in death, then it should not be the place of the government to force people to do it. Individuals should be able to consider the risks and decide for themselves.	con	This standard is unrealistic. The risk of death from any activity is not zero, but the government must have the authority to compel certain things to function. It even has the authority to draft soldiers in wartime, which is a very high-risk activity. The risk from vaccines is acceptably low when used as prescribed.
this standard is unrealistic. the risk of death from any activity is not zero, but the government must have the authority to compel certain things to function. it even has the authority to draft soldiers in wartime, which is a very high-risk activity. the risk from vaccines is acceptably low when used as prescribed.	5_1.6.9.2.1.	This standard is unrealistic. The risk of death from any activity is not zero, but the government must have the authority to compel certain things to function. It even has the authority to draft soldiers in wartime, which is a very high-risk activity. The risk from vaccines is acceptably low when used as prescribed.	pro	
one study observed a correlation between infant mortality rate and number of vaccines given to infants, among 34 developed countries	5_1.6.9.3.	One study observed a correlation between infant mortality rate and number of vaccines given to infants, among 34 developed countries	con	This study design is seriously flawed. Try studying "automobile ownership per capita" (or any other 1st-world variable, on which the US ranks high) and then compare US infant mortality rates to the 33 countries with lower infant mortality rates. You will find that most of those 33 countries rank lower on auto ownership. Then compare the US to the countries that rank #35-67 on infant mortality, and you will ALSO find that they have *lower* rates of auto ownership.	The cited study fails to effectively eliminate confounders to say with a high certainty that the stated correlation is a cause.	The study fails to take into account infant lives saved by vaccines studied.
this study design is seriously flawed. try studying "automobile ownership per capita" (or any other 1st-world variable, on which the us ranks high) and then compare us infant mortality rates to the 33 countries with lower infant mortality rates. you will find that most of those 33 countries rank lower on auto ownership. then compare the us to the countries that rank #35-67 on infant mortality, and you will also find that they have *lower* rates of auto ownership.	5_1.6.9.3.1.	This study design is seriously flawed. Try studying "automobile ownership per capita" (or any other 1st-world variable, on which the US ranks high) and then compare US infant mortality rates to the 33 countries with lower infant mortality rates. You will find that most of those 33 countries rank lower on auto ownership. Then compare the US to the countries that rank #35-67 on infant mortality, and you will ALSO find that they have *lower* rates of auto ownership.	pro	
the cited study fails to effectively eliminate confounders to say with a high certainty that the stated correlation is a cause.	5_1.6.9.3.2.	The cited study fails to effectively eliminate confounders to say with a high certainty that the stated correlation is a cause.	pro	We cannot know for sure that it is not causal. The possibility of it being so is certainly a reason not to mandate vaccines.	The authors did not claim a causal relationship was proven. Rather, they observed an association and called for more studies.
we cannot know for sure that it is not causal. the possibility of it being so is certainly a reason not to mandate vaccines.	5_1.6.9.3.2.1.	We cannot know for sure that it is not causal. The possibility of it being so is certainly a reason not to mandate vaccines.	con	
the authors did not claim a causal relationship was proven. rather, they observed an association and called for more studies.	5_1.6.9.3.2.2.	The authors did not claim a causal relationship was proven. Rather, they observed an association and called for more studies.	con	
the study fails to take into account infant lives saved by vaccines studied.	5_1.6.9.3.3.	The study fails to take into account infant lives saved by vaccines studied.	pro	Even if that study's observed correlation were to be shown to be a causal relationship the small increase in infant mortality is orders of magnitude smaller than the decrease in mortality from the vaccination programs.
even if that study's observed correlation were to be shown to be a causal relationship the small increase in infant mortality is orders of magnitude smaller than the decrease in mortality from the vaccination programs.	5_1.6.9.3.3.1.	Even if that study's observed correlation were to be shown to be a causal relationship the small increase in infant mortality is orders of magnitude smaller than the decrease in mortality from the vaccination programs.	pro	
diseases that are preventable with vaccination, like polio, also have disastrous effects on people's lives.	5_1.6.10.	Diseases that are preventable with vaccination, like polio, also have disastrous effects on people's lives.	pro	The vast majority of people who are infected with polio don't even show any symptoms.	1 in 200 cases lead to irreversible paralysis.
the vast majority of people who are infected with polio don't even show any symptoms.	5_1.6.10.1.	The vast majority of people who are infected with polio don't even show any symptoms.	con	Only 1%-2% resulted in nonparalytic meningitis, and fewer than 1% resulted in paralysis. Among paralytic cases, many recovered completely and most recovered muscle function to some degree.
only 1%-2% resulted in nonparalytic meningitis, and fewer than 1% resulted in paralysis. among paralytic cases, many recovered completely and most recovered muscle function to some degree.	5_1.6.10.1.1.	Only 1%-2% resulted in nonparalytic meningitis, and fewer than 1% resulted in paralysis. Among paralytic cases, many recovered completely and most recovered muscle function to some degree.	con	The less-than-1% rate of paralysis with polio infection, is far greater than the risk of paralysis or death from the vaccine
the less-than-1% rate of paralysis with polio infection, is far greater than the risk of paralysis or death from the vaccine	5_1.6.10.1.1.1.	The less-than-1% rate of paralysis with polio infection, is far greater than the risk of paralysis or death from the vaccine	pro	
1 in 200 cases lead to irreversible paralysis.	5_1.6.10.2.	1 in 200 cases lead to irreversible paralysis.	pro	
medical institutions and regulatory bodies should not be trusted with a mandatory vaccination policy.	5_1.7.	Medical institutions and regulatory bodies should not be trusted with a mandatory vaccination policy.	con	Vaccines are often developed, heavily regulated, and subsidized by the federal government in the interest of the general good.	The CDC has been linked to improper practice in the past.	So long as the pharmaceutical industry is a for-profit business, vaccines must not be mandatory.
vaccines are often developed, heavily regulated, and subsidized by the federal government in the interest of the general good.	5_1.7.1.	Vaccines are often developed, heavily regulated, and subsidized by the federal government in the interest of the general good.	pro	The claim begs the question whether public vaccine policy is "in the interest of the general good" as it is a matter of opinion and highly debatable, to say the least.
the claim begs the question whether public vaccine policy is "in the interest of the general good" as it is a matter of opinion and highly debatable, to say the least.	5_1.7.1.1.	The claim begs the question whether public vaccine policy is "in the interest of the general good" as it is a matter of opinion and highly debatable, to say the least.	con	Except of course that it's not exactly "highly debatable", when it comes to the scientific community, which is pretty clear on both whether vaccines are safe and whether they should be mandatory due to the fact that they've been preventing life-threatening diseases for ages.
except of course that it's not exactly "highly debatable", when it comes to the scientific community, which is pretty clear on both whether vaccines are safe and whether they should be mandatory due to the fact that they've been preventing life-threatening diseases for ages.	5_1.7.1.1.1.	Except of course that it's not exactly "highly debatable", when it comes to the scientific community, which is pretty clear on both whether vaccines are safe and whether they should be mandatory due to the fact that they've been preventing life-threatening diseases for ages.	pro	
the cdc has been linked to improper practice in the past.	5_1.7.2.	The CDC has been linked to improper practice in the past.	con	The CDC does not regulate vaccine development.
the cdc does not regulate vaccine development.	5_1.7.2.1.	The CDC does not regulate vaccine development.	pro	The CDC facilitates the research and monitoring of communicable diseases and their prevention, and is not responsible for the regulation of vaccinations; that jobs falls to the FDA.
the cdc facilitates the research and monitoring of communicable diseases and their prevention, and is not responsible for the regulation of vaccinations; that jobs falls to the fda.	5_1.7.2.1.1.	The CDC facilitates the research and monitoring of communicable diseases and their prevention, and is not responsible for the regulation of vaccinations; that jobs falls to the FDA.	pro	
so long as the pharmaceutical industry is a for-profit business, vaccines must not be mandatory.	5_1.7.3.	So long as the pharmaceutical industry is a for-profit business, vaccines must not be mandatory.	con	Many mandatory safety measures (like smoke detectors or fire extinguishers) involve promoting products that are made by for-profit companies.	Mandatory vaccination would eliminate incentive for proper long-term, in-depth study into understanding, identifying and bypassing mechanisms of vaccine injury and improved administration techniques for increased safety, efficacy, and cost efficiency as any such endeavours would only serve to reduce profitability when administering to a population that has no choice, regardless of those factors.
many mandatory safety measures (like smoke detectors or fire extinguishers) involve promoting products that are made by for-profit companies.	5_1.7.3.1.	Many mandatory safety measures (like smoke detectors or fire extinguishers) involve promoting products that are made by for-profit companies.	pro	
mandatory vaccination would eliminate incentive for proper long-term, in-depth study into understanding, identifying and bypassing mechanisms of vaccine injury and improved administration techniques for increased safety, efficacy, and cost efficiency as any such endeavours would only serve to reduce profitability when administering to a population that has no choice, regardless of those factors.	5_1.7.3.2.	Mandatory vaccination would eliminate incentive for proper long-term, in-depth study into understanding, identifying and bypassing mechanisms of vaccine injury and improved administration techniques for increased safety, efficacy, and cost efficiency as any such endeavours would only serve to reduce profitability when administering to a population that has no choice, regardless of those factors.	con	In the case of other industries where safety features and equipment are mandate, there are independent regulatory bodies which certify that the product meets the required standards.	If vaccines are mandatory, there is still competition between different pharma companies for market share based on efficacy, cost, and side effects among the multiple vaccines for a given disease.
in the case of other industries where safety features and equipment are mandate, there are independent regulatory bodies which certify that the product meets the required standards.	5_1.7.3.2.1.	In the case of other industries where safety features and equipment are mandate, there are independent regulatory bodies which certify that the product meets the required standards.	pro	Underwriters Laboratory establishes national (US) standards and certifies the effectiveness and smoke detectors in the US. UL does not manufacture smoke alarms or profit in any way from promoting their use.
underwriters laboratory establishes national (us) standards and certifies the effectiveness and smoke detectors in the us. ul does not manufacture smoke alarms or profit in any way from promoting their use.	5_1.7.3.2.1.1.	Underwriters Laboratory establishes national (US) standards and certifies the effectiveness and smoke detectors in the US. UL does not manufacture smoke alarms or profit in any way from promoting their use.	pro	
if vaccines are mandatory, there is still competition between different pharma companies for market share based on efficacy, cost, and side effects among the multiple vaccines for a given disease.	5_1.7.3.2.2.	If vaccines are mandatory, there is still competition between different pharma companies for market share based on efficacy, cost, and side effects among the multiple vaccines for a given disease.	pro	
parents choosing not to vaccinate their children is child neglect, and the government should intervene to prevent this.	5_1.8.	Parents choosing not to vaccinate their children is child neglect, and the government should intervene to prevent this.	pro	Children do not have the same capacity to advocate for themselves as adults do, so the government must step in to ensure their best interests are being met.	Some parents don't vaccinate their children because they never get around to it, rather than being opposed to vaccines. Making it mandatory increases the importance and urgency of getting their children vaccinated and makes them more likely to prioritise doing it.	Parents should be allowed to make their own choices when it comes to medical decisions about their children.	There are too many vaccines to say children should get all. Just read CDC's report on death after vaccines each year please.	If a parent deliberately withheld any other form of medicine from their child, they would most likely be prosecuted for neglect.
children do not have the same capacity to advocate for themselves as adults do, so the government must step in to ensure their best interests are being met.	5_1.8.1.	Children do not have the same capacity to advocate for themselves as adults do, so the government must step in to ensure their best interests are being met.	pro	If the government feels that children will suffer at the hand of parents regarding some medical decisions, they have a duty to make actions compulsory.
if the government feels that children will suffer at the hand of parents regarding some medical decisions, they have a duty to make actions compulsory.	5_1.8.1.1.	If the government feels that children will suffer at the hand of parents regarding some medical decisions, they have a duty to make actions compulsory.	pro	There have been cases of governments determining that children of Jehovah's Witnesses should receive blood transfusions, even in the face of objections from their parents.
there have been cases of governments determining that children of jehovah's witnesses should receive blood transfusions, even in the face of objections from their parents.	5_1.8.1.1.1.	There have been cases of governments determining that children of Jehovah's Witnesses should receive blood transfusions, even in the face of objections from their parents.	pro	The Supreme Court in Canada ruled on such a case, saying that 'such medical interventions are constitutionally sound, striking a balance between the choice of the child and the state's protection of the child.'	A high court judge in the United Kingdom ruled that a young boy could receive a blood transfusion despite religious objections from his parents.
the supreme court in canada ruled on such a case, saying that 'such medical interventions are constitutionally sound, striking a balance between the choice of the child and the state's protection of the child.'	5_1.8.1.1.1.1.	The Supreme Court in Canada ruled on such a case, saying that 'such medical interventions are constitutionally sound, striking a balance between the choice of the child and the state's protection of the child.'	pro	Just because something is constitutionally sound does not mean it is ethically the right decision.
just because something is constitutionally sound does not mean it is ethically the right decision.	5_1.8.1.1.1.1.1.	Just because something is constitutionally sound does not mean it is ethically the right decision.	con	
a high court judge in the united kingdom ruled that a young boy could receive a blood transfusion despite religious objections from his parents.	5_1.8.1.1.1.2.	A high court judge in the United Kingdom ruled that a young boy could receive a blood transfusion despite religious objections from his parents.	pro	
some parents don't vaccinate their children because they never get around to it, rather than being opposed to vaccines. making it mandatory increases the importance and urgency of getting their children vaccinated and makes them more likely to prioritise doing it.	5_1.8.2.	Some parents don't vaccinate their children because they never get around to it, rather than being opposed to vaccines. Making it mandatory increases the importance and urgency of getting their children vaccinated and makes them more likely to prioritise doing it.	pro	
parents should be allowed to make their own choices when it comes to medical decisions about their children.	5_1.8.3.	Parents should be allowed to make their own choices when it comes to medical decisions about their children.	con	We give parents the freedom to make many other choices about their children's lives which can effect their futures. They often choose their schools, control their diets etc. Medical decisions should be no different.	Parents are in the unique position of knowing their child closely on an individual level. This means that they are in the best position to know what is in the best interest of their child.	Children have their own individual bodies and as such should have their own rights over their bodies. For this reason, parents should not have complete control over this.	Parents do not have unlimited authority to consent on their child's behalf.	Parents should not be the ones who decide when that choice has a far-reaching effect on the overall health status of the community.	In the case of vaccines, parents are not just making a decision on behalf of their child, but on behalf of numerous other people that child comes into contact with and could potentially infect.
we give parents the freedom to make many other choices about their children's lives which can effect their futures. they often choose their schools, control their diets etc. medical decisions should be no different.	5_1.8.3.1.	We give parents the freedom to make many other choices about their children's lives which can effect their futures. They often choose their schools, control their diets etc. Medical decisions should be no different.	con	The state takes away those freedoms on very important decisions, or when parents make unsafe choices.
the state takes away those freedoms on very important decisions, or when parents make unsafe choices.	5_1.8.3.1.1.	The state takes away those freedoms on very important decisions, or when parents make unsafe choices.	pro	Child car seats had to be enforced by the government, as many parents did not buy them.
child car seats had to be enforced by the government, as many parents did not buy them.	5_1.8.3.1.1.1.	Child car seats had to be enforced by the government, as many parents did not buy them.	pro	
parents are in the unique position of knowing their child closely on an individual level. this means that they are in the best position to know what is in the best interest of their child.	5_1.8.3.2.	Parents are in the unique position of knowing their child closely on an individual level. This means that they are in the best position to know what is in the best interest of their child.	con	Parents are often emotive in their decision making rather than rational. They are more likely to be swayed by questionable but emotive anti-vaccine sources than medical professionals who are better able to discern scientific evidence from pseudoscience.	It's unclear what special knowledge a parent has about their child at two months (when most doctors recommend children be vaccinated against polio) in terms of deciding whether or not to vaccinate their child that a medical professional also would not have.
parents are often emotive in their decision making rather than rational. they are more likely to be swayed by questionable but emotive anti-vaccine sources than medical professionals who are better able to discern scientific evidence from pseudoscience.	5_1.8.3.2.1.	Parents are often emotive in their decision making rather than rational. They are more likely to be swayed by questionable but emotive anti-vaccine sources than medical professionals who are better able to discern scientific evidence from pseudoscience.	pro	
it's unclear what special knowledge a parent has about their child at two months (when most doctors recommend children be vaccinated against polio) in terms of deciding whether or not to vaccinate their child that a medical professional also would not have.	5_1.8.3.2.2.	It's unclear what special knowledge a parent has about their child at two months (when most doctors recommend children be vaccinated against polio) in terms of deciding whether or not to vaccinate their child that a medical professional also would not have.	pro	
children have their own individual bodies and as such should have their own rights over their bodies. for this reason, parents should not have complete control over this.	5_1.8.3.3.	Children have their own individual bodies and as such should have their own rights over their bodies. For this reason, parents should not have complete control over this.	pro	
parents do not have unlimited authority to consent on their child's behalf.	5_1.8.3.4.	Parents do not have unlimited authority to consent on their child's behalf.	pro	In most jurisdictions, adolescents can consent to certain medical treatments without the consent of their parents, and courts and laws can overrule parental decisions (for example, to require that a child receive a blood transfusion against parental wishes) where the health of the child is at stake. This is hardly an unrestricted authority.	In many jurisdictions, courts can overrule parents' decisions, and in some cases there are certain procedures that courts must approve in advance.	A legal precedent exists to classify not vaccinating children as medical child neglect, for it puts children at unnecessary risk of infectious and deadly disease.
in most jurisdictions, adolescents can consent to certain medical treatments without the consent of their parents, and courts and laws can overrule parental decisions (for example, to require that a child receive a blood transfusion against parental wishes) where the health of the child is at stake. this is hardly an unrestricted authority.	5_1.8.3.4.1.	In most jurisdictions, adolescents can consent to certain medical treatments without the consent of their parents, and courts and laws can overrule parental decisions (for example, to require that a child receive a blood transfusion against parental wishes) where the health of the child is at stake. This is hardly an unrestricted authority.	pro	In the UK, girls have to consent to being vaccinated. If they refuse, the parents cannot override their decision.	In the UK, children below the age of medical consent who are Gillick competent can consent to medical treatment, including if their parents disagree with their decision.	In Australia, children below the age of medical consent who are Gillick competent can consent to medical treatment, including if their parents disagree with their decision.	In the matter of blood transfusions, an emergency order must be entered by a judge.	In Florida, a minor may only consent to treatment for an STI, or pregnancy.
in the uk, girls have to consent to being vaccinated. if they refuse, the parents cannot override their decision.	5_1.8.3.4.1.1.	In the UK, girls have to consent to being vaccinated. If they refuse, the parents cannot override their decision.	pro	
in the uk, children below the age of medical consent who are gillick competent can consent to medical treatment, including if their parents disagree with their decision.	5_1.8.3.4.1.2.	In the UK, children below the age of medical consent who are Gillick competent can consent to medical treatment, including if their parents disagree with their decision.	pro	
in australia, children below the age of medical consent who are gillick competent can consent to medical treatment, including if their parents disagree with their decision.	5_1.8.3.4.1.3.	In Australia, children below the age of medical consent who are Gillick competent can consent to medical treatment, including if their parents disagree with their decision.	pro	
in the matter of blood transfusions, an emergency order must be entered by a judge.	5_1.8.3.4.1.4.	In the matter of blood transfusions, an emergency order must be entered by a judge.	con	
in florida, a minor may only consent to treatment for an sti, or pregnancy.	5_1.8.3.4.1.5.	In Florida, a minor may only consent to treatment for an STI, or pregnancy.	con	
in many jurisdictions, courts can overrule parents' decisions, and in some cases there are certain procedures that courts must approve in advance.	5_1.8.3.4.2.	In many jurisdictions, courts can overrule parents' decisions, and in some cases there are certain procedures that courts must approve in advance.	pro	In Australia, state Supreme Courts have parens patriae jurisdiction (the power to make decisions for those unable to make them themselves), and Family Courts have welfare provisions allowing them to intervene to determine the proper course of medical treatment for a minor.	In Australia, there are certain medical procedures that require the decision of a court to perform.	The fact that the state "can" do something doesn't make it right.
in australia, state supreme courts have parens patriae jurisdiction (the power to make decisions for those unable to make them themselves), and family courts have welfare provisions allowing them to intervene to determine the proper course of medical treatment for a minor.	5_1.8.3.4.2.1.	In Australia, state Supreme Courts have parens patriae jurisdiction (the power to make decisions for those unable to make them themselves), and Family Courts have welfare provisions allowing them to intervene to determine the proper course of medical treatment for a minor.	pro	
in australia, there are certain medical procedures that require the decision of a court to perform.	5_1.8.3.4.2.2.	In Australia, there are certain medical procedures that require the decision of a court to perform.	pro	The sterilisation of a young person with an intellectual disability requires court approval.	The termination of a minor who is not Gillick competent's pregnancy requires court approval.	Both hormone treatment for gender identity disorder and sex reassignment surgery require court approval if the patient is a minor.	The withdrawal of medical treatment from a child requires court approval.
the sterilisation of a young person with an intellectual disability requires court approval.	5_1.8.3.4.2.2.1.	The sterilisation of a young person with an intellectual disability requires court approval.	pro	
the termination of a minor who is not gillick competent's pregnancy requires court approval.	5_1.8.3.4.2.2.2.	The termination of a minor who is not Gillick competent's pregnancy requires court approval.	pro	
both hormone treatment for gender identity disorder and sex reassignment surgery require court approval if the patient is a minor.	5_1.8.3.4.2.2.3.	Both hormone treatment for gender identity disorder and sex reassignment surgery require court approval if the patient is a minor.	pro	
the withdrawal of medical treatment from a child requires court approval.	5_1.8.3.4.2.2.4.	The withdrawal of medical treatment from a child requires court approval.	pro	
the fact that the state "can" do something doesn't make it right.	5_1.8.3.4.2.3.	The fact that the state "can" do something doesn't make it right.	con	
a legal precedent exists to classify not vaccinating children as medical child neglect, for it puts children at unnecessary risk of infectious and deadly disease.	5_1.8.3.4.3.	A legal precedent exists to classify not vaccinating children as medical child neglect, for it puts children at unnecessary risk of infectious and deadly disease.	con	
parents should not be the ones who decide when that choice has a far-reaching effect on the overall health status of the community.	5_1.8.3.5.	Parents should not be the ones who decide when that choice has a far-reaching effect on the overall health status of the community.	pro	Society has a right to require that people minimize death and disease where possible.	Vaccination programmes rely on herd-immunity to be effective.	Vaccines carry risk, and some children may be genetically predisposed to vaccine injury.
society has a right to require that people minimize death and disease where possible.	5_1.8.3.5.1.	Society has a right to require that people minimize death and disease where possible.	pro	
vaccination programmes rely on herd-immunity to be effective.	5_1.8.3.5.2.	Vaccination programmes rely on herd-immunity to be effective.	pro	Herd immunity protects people who cannot have vaccinations by preventing those who can be vaccinated from carrying harmful diseases. Therefore, herd immunity is at its strongest when vaccinations are mandatory.	Herd immunity puts evolutional pressure on viruses to escape herd immunity. This makes them potentially more dangerous by causing antigenic shift.	The need to protect others through herd immunity does not justify mandating the vaccine for those who are opposed to getting it.	Universal mandatory vaccination is not necessary to achieve herd immunity.	Mandates are not necessary to achieve high enough rates of vaccination required for herd immunity.	In the Netherlands, measles returned in a community with low vaccine uptake.	People who fail to vaccinate are free riding on herd immunity and should be required to do their part.	Not all vaccines create herd immunity.	Without sufficient vaccination rates, diseases cannot be eradicated, meaning that the pathogens which cause them can mutate, creating new strains which can also infect previously vaccinated people. Low vaccine uptake puts the entire population at risk.
herd immunity puts evolutional pressure on viruses to escape herd immunity. this makes them potentially more dangerous by causing antigenic shift.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.	Herd immunity puts evolutional pressure on viruses to escape herd immunity. This makes them potentially more dangerous by causing antigenic shift.	con	Environmental pressures do not "cause" mutations. DNA mutation occurs spontaneously at a background rate, unless exposed to mutagens (like ionizing radiation). Evolutionary/ Environmental pressures only select for the "fittest" strains from among the spontaneously occurring mutations.	Historically, the rate of antigenic shift has not been affected by vaccination.	Vaccines that keep hosts alive but still allow transmission could thus allow very virulent strains to circulate in a population.	Mass vaccination for Hib has caused antigenic drift so that vaccine resistant strains are more dominant.	Viruses potentially being more dangerous in the future is worth less illness and death in the present.	Some vaccines are causing strain replacement.	Antigenic shift does not negate the use of medicines such as vaccines/antibiotics.	Mass vaccination for pertussis has caused antigenic drift of the bacteria so that today the dominant strain in circulation in the US lacks a key antigen component of the vaccine and it is therefore vaccine resistant.	The heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine caused antigenic shift that led to replacement invasive pneumococcal diseases for children in Alaska.	An inevitable result of evolutionary selection or elimination of a particular pathogen will give rise to antigen shift.
environmental pressures do not "cause" mutations. dna mutation occurs spontaneously at a background rate, unless exposed to mutagens (like ionizing radiation). evolutionary/ environmental pressures only select for the "fittest" strains from among the spontaneously occurring mutations.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.1.	Environmental pressures do not "cause" mutations. DNA mutation occurs spontaneously at a background rate, unless exposed to mutagens (like ionizing radiation). Evolutionary/ Environmental pressures only select for the "fittest" strains from among the spontaneously occurring mutations.	pro	
historically, the rate of antigenic shift has not been affected by vaccination.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.2.	Historically, the rate of antigenic shift has not been affected by vaccination.	pro	Smallpox is eradicated, and polio is close to being eradicated, because the organisms did not mutate fast enough to "get ahead of" the vaccine.	Flu strains change every year, but there is no evidence that they are changing faster or becoming more dangerous since the advent of vaccines.
smallpox is eradicated, and polio is close to being eradicated, because the organisms did not mutate fast enough to "get ahead of" the vaccine.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.2.1.	Smallpox is eradicated, and polio is close to being eradicated, because the organisms did not mutate fast enough to "get ahead of" the vaccine.	pro	
flu strains change every year, but there is no evidence that they are changing faster or becoming more dangerous since the advent of vaccines.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.2.2.	Flu strains change every year, but there is no evidence that they are changing faster or becoming more dangerous since the advent of vaccines.	pro	
vaccines that keep hosts alive but still allow transmission could thus allow very virulent strains to circulate in a population.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.3.	Vaccines that keep hosts alive but still allow transmission could thus allow very virulent strains to circulate in a population.	con	There's no good evidence that the singular case in that study generalizes well to any of the vaccines currently on the schedule.
there's no good evidence that the singular case in that study generalizes well to any of the vaccines currently on the schedule.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.3.1.	There's no good evidence that the singular case in that study generalizes well to any of the vaccines currently on the schedule.	pro	
mass vaccination for hib has caused antigenic drift so that vaccine resistant strains are more dominant.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.4.	Mass vaccination for Hib has caused antigenic drift so that vaccine resistant strains are more dominant.	con	Environmental pressures do not "cause" mutations. DNA mutation occurs spontaneously at a background rate, unless exposed to mutagens (like ionizing radiation). Evolutionary/ Environmental pressures only select for the "fittest" strains from among the spontaneously occurring mutations.	The above citation (compare footnotes 6 & 7 says that invasive H Flu became much less common as vaccine-preventable strains were diminished. Of the remaining infections, a higher *percentage* occurred in adults, since the *absolute number* of cases previously occurring in kids was diminished(The HIB vaccine is only given to kids.) This is the mathematical result of decreasing one variable.	This has simply shifted the risk burden away from those in whom it is well tolerated onto those in whom there is a higher risk of complications.
the above citation (compare footnotes 6 & 7 says that invasive h flu became much less common as vaccine-preventable strains were diminished. of the remaining infections, a higher *percentage* occurred in adults, since the *absolute number* of cases previously occurring in kids was diminished(the hib vaccine is only given to kids.) this is the mathematical result of decreasing one variable.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.4.2.	The above citation (compare footnotes 6 & 7 says that invasive H Flu became much less common as vaccine-preventable strains were diminished. Of the remaining infections, a higher *percentage* occurred in adults, since the *absolute number* of cases previously occurring in kids was diminished(The HIB vaccine is only given to kids.) This is the mathematical result of decreasing one variable.	pro	
this has simply shifted the risk burden away from those in whom it is well tolerated onto those in whom there is a higher risk of complications.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.4.3.	This has simply shifted the risk burden away from those in whom it is well tolerated onto those in whom there is a higher risk of complications.	con	
viruses potentially being more dangerous in the future is worth less illness and death in the present.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.5.	Viruses potentially being more dangerous in the future is worth less illness and death in the present.	pro	
some vaccines are causing strain replacement.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.6.	Some vaccines are causing strain replacement.	con	
antigenic shift does not negate the use of medicines such as vaccines/antibiotics.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.7.	Antigenic shift does not negate the use of medicines such as vaccines/antibiotics.	pro	
mass vaccination for pertussis has caused antigenic drift of the bacteria so that today the dominant strain in circulation in the us lacks a key antigen component of the vaccine and it is therefore vaccine resistant.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.8.	Mass vaccination for pertussis has caused antigenic drift of the bacteria so that today the dominant strain in circulation in the US lacks a key antigen component of the vaccine and it is therefore vaccine resistant.	con	According to the CDC, vaccinated individuals are more likely to be infected with this strain than unvaccinated individuals.
according to the cdc, vaccinated individuals are more likely to be infected with this strain than unvaccinated individuals.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.8.1.	According to the CDC, vaccinated individuals are more likely to be infected with this strain than unvaccinated individuals.	con	Viruses potentially being more dangerous in the future is worth less illness and death in the present.
the heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine caused antigenic shift that led to replacement invasive pneumococcal diseases for children in alaska.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.9.	The heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine caused antigenic shift that led to replacement invasive pneumococcal diseases for children in Alaska.	con	
an inevitable result of evolutionary selection or elimination of a particular pathogen will give rise to antigen shift.	5_1.8.3.5.2.2.10.	An inevitable result of evolutionary selection or elimination of a particular pathogen will give rise to antigen shift.	pro	
the need to protect others through herd immunity does not justify mandating the vaccine for those who are opposed to getting it.	5_1.8.3.5.2.3.	The need to protect others through herd immunity does not justify mandating the vaccine for those who are opposed to getting it.	con	The right to informed consent is not absolute and should be balanced against other rights, such as the right to protection from lethal diseases.
the right to informed consent is not absolute and should be balanced against other rights, such as the right to protection from lethal diseases.	5_1.8.3.5.2.3.1.	The right to informed consent is not absolute and should be balanced against other rights, such as the right to protection from lethal diseases.	pro	There is no such thing as a "right of people not to die" of any disease.	The argument that it's okay to violate the right to informed consent to a certain degree is simply a rejection of this most fundamental medical ethic.
there is no such thing as a "right of people not to die" of any disease.	5_1.8.3.5.2.3.1.1.	There is no such thing as a "right of people not to die" of any disease.	con	Society can mandate vaccines to save thousands or millions of lives. It would be unethical to allow those millions to die in order to enforce a competing ethic that has a significantly lower human cost.
society can mandate vaccines to save thousands or millions of lives. it would be unethical to allow those millions to die in order to enforce a competing ethic that has a significantly lower human cost.	5_1.8.3.5.2.3.1.1.1.	Society can mandate vaccines to save thousands or millions of lives. It would be unethical to allow those millions to die in order to enforce a competing ethic that has a significantly lower human cost.	pro	
the argument that it's okay to violate the right to informed consent to a certain degree is simply a rejection of this most fundamental medical ethic.	5_1.8.3.5.2.3.1.2.	The argument that it's okay to violate the right to informed consent to a certain degree is simply a rejection of this most fundamental medical ethic.	con	All ethics are situational and must be balanced against other competing ethics. No single ethic can be seen as fundamental over all others.
all ethics are situational and must be balanced against other competing ethics. no single ethic can be seen as fundamental over all others.	5_1.8.3.5.2.3.1.2.1.	All ethics are situational and must be balanced against other competing ethics. No single ethic can be seen as fundamental over all others.	pro	
universal mandatory vaccination is not necessary to achieve herd immunity.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.	Universal mandatory vaccination is not necessary to achieve herd immunity.	con	Mandates are not necessary to achieve high enough rates of vaccination required for herd immunity.	Ring vaccination, whereby only those known to have a disease and their contacts, is highly effective.
mandates are not necessary to achieve high enough rates of vaccination required for herd immunity.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.1.	Mandates are not necessary to achieve high enough rates of vaccination required for herd immunity.	con	Countries like Sweden, Norway, Denmark and the Netherlands(There are countries with high vaccination rates without compulsory vaccination and governments do not want to disrupt public trust and self-responsibility by making vaccination compulsory, particularly if it is not seen as needed. It has been argued that high coverage has been achieved through “other approaches or efforts” and so acceptance of compulsory vaccination might be problematic in countries such as Sweden, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, and the UK.) have high vaccination rates despite them being voluntary.	Mandates, with stricter criteria for exemptions, were correlated with higher immunization rates in a state-by-state (US) observational study.
countries like sweden, norway, denmark and the netherlands(there are countries with high vaccination rates without compulsory vaccination and governments do not want to disrupt public trust and self-responsibility by making vaccination compulsory, particularly if it is not seen as needed. it has been argued that high coverage has been achieved through “other approaches or efforts” and so acceptance of compulsory vaccination might be problematic in countries such as sweden, norway, denmark, the netherlands, and the uk.) have high vaccination rates despite them being voluntary.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.1.1.	Countries like Sweden, Norway, Denmark and the Netherlands(There are countries with high vaccination rates without compulsory vaccination and governments do not want to disrupt public trust and self-responsibility by making vaccination compulsory, particularly if it is not seen as needed. It has been argued that high coverage has been achieved through “other approaches or efforts” and so acceptance of compulsory vaccination might be problematic in countries such as Sweden, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, and the UK.) have high vaccination rates despite them being voluntary.	con	
mandates, with stricter criteria for exemptions, were correlated with higher immunization rates in a state-by-state (us) observational study.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.1.2.	Mandates, with stricter criteria for exemptions, were correlated with higher immunization rates in a state-by-state (US) observational study.	pro	The point remains that it is not the lack of mandates itself that results in lower vaccination rates. It is the government coercion plus some other factor, i.e., a decision that the proposed benefits of the vaccine do not outweigh the risks, that results in the lower rates.
the point remains that it is not the lack of mandates itself that results in lower vaccination rates. it is the government coercion plus some other factor, i.e., a decision that the proposed benefits of the vaccine do not outweigh the risks, that results in the lower rates.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.1.2.1.	The point remains that it is not the lack of mandates itself that results in lower vaccination rates. It is the government coercion plus some other factor, i.e., a decision that the proposed benefits of the vaccine do not outweigh the risks, that results in the lower rates.	con	
ring vaccination, whereby only those known to have a disease and their contacts, is highly effective.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.	Ring vaccination, whereby only those known to have a disease and their contacts, is highly effective.	con	Ring vaccination will not work for a disease that is very widespread. Universal vaccination for smallpox was recommended until the case rate worldwide was restricted to a few geographic areas.	Ring vaccination presumes that there is no non-human host or environmental reservoir for the disease. It would not be adequate to only vaccinate human contacts, if the disease cold remain infectious in soil (like tetanus)	Ring vaccination cannot work if there is asymptomatic carriage of the infectious agent, as with pertussis.	The success of a ring vaccination depends heavily on timely reports and examinations - which is not always a given.	Ring vaccination led to the disappearance of smallpox in eastern Nigeria even though the population coverage was less than 50%.
ring vaccination will not work for a disease that is very widespread. universal vaccination for smallpox was recommended until the case rate worldwide was restricted to a few geographic areas.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.1.	Ring vaccination will not work for a disease that is very widespread. Universal vaccination for smallpox was recommended until the case rate worldwide was restricted to a few geographic areas.	pro	
ring vaccination presumes that there is no non-human host or environmental reservoir for the disease. it would not be adequate to only vaccinate human contacts, if the disease cold remain infectious in soil (like tetanus)	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.2.	Ring vaccination presumes that there is no non-human host or environmental reservoir for the disease. It would not be adequate to only vaccinate human contacts, if the disease cold remain infectious in soil (like tetanus)	pro	
ring vaccination cannot work if there is asymptomatic carriage of the infectious agent, as with pertussis.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.3.	Ring vaccination cannot work if there is asymptomatic carriage of the infectious agent, as with pertussis.	pro	
the success of a ring vaccination depends heavily on timely reports and examinations - which is not always a given.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.4.	The success of a ring vaccination depends heavily on timely reports and examinations - which is not always a given.	pro	In remote areas without effective medical care and infrastructure, it is difficult to get ring vaccinations on time.
in remote areas without effective medical care and infrastructure, it is difficult to get ring vaccinations on time.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.4.1.	In remote areas without effective medical care and infrastructure, it is difficult to get ring vaccinations on time.	pro	
ring vaccination led to the disappearance of smallpox in eastern nigeria even though the population coverage was less than 50%.	5_1.8.3.5.2.4.2.5.	Ring vaccination led to the disappearance of smallpox in eastern Nigeria even though the population coverage was less than 50%.	con	
people who fail to vaccinate are free riding on herd immunity and should be required to do their part.	5_1.8.3.5.2.7.	People who fail to vaccinate are free riding on herd immunity and should be required to do their part.	pro	
not all vaccines create herd immunity.	5_1.8.3.5.2.8.	Not all vaccines create herd immunity.	con	Herd immunity is only relevant for diseases that are transmitted person-to-person. Thus, tetanus vaccine cannot produce herd immunity.	Mass vaccination for pertussis can actually put infants at greater risk. The vaccine does not create herd immunity as vaccinated individuals can still carry and spread the disease.	The inactivated polio vaccine does not prevent transmission of the disease and therefore cannot create herd immunity.
herd immunity is only relevant for diseases that are transmitted person-to-person. thus, tetanus vaccine cannot produce herd immunity.	5_1.8.3.5.2.8.1.	Herd immunity is only relevant for diseases that are transmitted person-to-person. Thus, tetanus vaccine cannot produce herd immunity.	con	
mass vaccination for pertussis can actually put infants at greater risk. the vaccine does not create herd immunity as vaccinated individuals can still carry and spread the disease.	5_1.8.3.5.2.8.2.	Mass vaccination for pertussis can actually put infants at greater risk. The vaccine does not create herd immunity as vaccinated individuals can still carry and spread the disease.	con	Individuals vaccinated for pertussis who still carry disease, are likely to be asymptomatic, so families don't know to keep older siblings away from the baby in the family. This puts infant siblings at risk.
individuals vaccinated for pertussis who still carry disease, are likely to be asymptomatic, so families don't know to keep older siblings away from the baby in the family. this puts infant siblings at risk.	5_1.8.3.5.2.8.2.1.	Individuals vaccinated for pertussis who still carry disease, are likely to be asymptomatic, so families don't know to keep older siblings away from the baby in the family. This puts infant siblings at risk.	con	
the inactivated polio vaccine does not prevent transmission of the disease and therefore cannot create herd immunity.	5_1.8.3.5.2.8.3.	The inactivated polio vaccine does not prevent transmission of the disease and therefore cannot create herd immunity.	con	
without sufficient vaccination rates, diseases cannot be eradicated, meaning that the pathogens which cause them can mutate, creating new strains which can also infect previously vaccinated people. low vaccine uptake puts the entire population at risk.	5_1.8.3.5.2.9.	Without sufficient vaccination rates, diseases cannot be eradicated, meaning that the pathogens which cause them can mutate, creating new strains which can also infect previously vaccinated people. Low vaccine uptake puts the entire population at risk.	pro	
in the case of vaccines, parents are not just making a decision on behalf of their child, but on behalf of numerous other people that child comes into contact with and could potentially infect.	5_1.8.3.6.	In the case of vaccines, parents are not just making a decision on behalf of their child, but on behalf of numerous other people that child comes into contact with and could potentially infect.	pro	
there are too many vaccines to say children should get all. just read cdc's report on death after vaccines each year please.	5_1.8.4.	There are too many vaccines to say children should get all. Just read CDC's report on death after vaccines each year please.	con	France & Italy have set 10-12 vaccines to attend school.	The fact that it wouldn't be reasonable to mandate every vaccine in existence does not mean that at least some of them should not be mandatory.
france & italy have set 10-12 vaccines to attend school.	5_1.8.4.1.	France & Italy have set 10-12 vaccines to attend school.	con	
the fact that it wouldn't be reasonable to mandate every vaccine in existence does not mean that at least some of them should not be mandatory.	5_1.8.4.2.	The fact that it wouldn't be reasonable to mandate every vaccine in existence does not mean that at least some of them should not be mandatory.	pro	
if a parent deliberately withheld any other form of medicine from their child, they would most likely be prosecuted for neglect.	5_1.8.5.	If a parent deliberately withheld any other form of medicine from their child, they would most likely be prosecuted for neglect.	pro	
mandatory vaccines would infringe upon individuals' human rights.	5_1.10.	Mandatory vaccines would infringe upon individuals' human rights.	con	Society has a right to require that people minimize death and disease where possible.	Mandatory vaccinations would impose on people's right to bodily integrity.	If there is any possibility of something resulting in death, then it should not be the place of the government to force people to do it. Individuals should be able to consider the risks and decide for themselves.	Mandatory vaccination violates the right to informed consent.	Human rights are contingent on the protection of other people's safety. Not vaccinating is unsafe for yourself and others.	The right to refuse medical intervention can already be overridden in circumstances where this refusal creates risk for others (e.g. sectioning of high-risk mental health patients, or isolation of people with dangerous infectious diseases). The same precedent could easily be applied to vaccination.	One could use the same logic to claim murderers should not be incarcerated as that infringes their right to freedom. It is easy to raise a sentimental response, much more so than perform a concise exchange of arguments. That is fundamentally the root of this debate. How can statistical certainty compare to the sentiment a hurt child provokes? However the exact same logical fallacies characterise both arguments, as it is not a matter of opinion as much as a competition between fact and sentiment.
mandatory vaccinations would impose on people's right to bodily integrity.	5_1.10.2.	Mandatory vaccinations would impose on people's right to bodily integrity.	con	Society has a right to require that people minimize death and disease where possible.	One cannot force another to take part in any health activity.	Mandatory vaccination violates the right to informed consent.	Mandatory vaccination would primarily (or, depending on the specific law, only) affect young children, who already have all of their medical decisions made for them by adults.	Knowingly putting a child at risk of contracting a deadly disease is arguably a greater violation of bodily autonomy than vaccinating them.	An individual has a right to life. Their parents do not have the right to unreasonably risk this right.	Quarantine is morally justifiable, and vaccination is less intrusive than this.	Spreading preventable communicable diseases is a violation of the rights of other's personal bodily integrity.
one cannot force another to take part in any health activity.	5_1.10.2.2.	One cannot force another to take part in any health activity.	con	Mandatory vaccination takes away an individual's right to choose with informed consent, and without informed consent it is medically unethical to force a medicine, medical procedure, or surgery upon the patient.	People are permitted to smoke, drink, and pursue other activities that are dangerous to their health.	This is untrue - the law already provides for enforced medical treatment where lack of this treatment risks the lives of others (e.g. a person who becomes violent as a result of psychological illness can be 'sectioned' under the Mental Health Act).
mandatory vaccination takes away an individual's right to choose with informed consent, and without informed consent it is medically unethical to force a medicine, medical procedure, or surgery upon the patient.	5_1.10.2.2.1.	Mandatory vaccination takes away an individual's right to choose with informed consent, and without informed consent it is medically unethical to force a medicine, medical procedure, or surgery upon the patient.	con	
people are permitted to smoke, drink, and pursue other activities that are dangerous to their health.	5_1.10.2.2.2.	People are permitted to smoke, drink, and pursue other activities that are dangerous to their health.	con	
this is untrue - the law already provides for enforced medical treatment where lack of this treatment risks the lives of others (e.g. a person who becomes violent as a result of psychological illness can be 'sectioned' under the mental health act).	5_1.10.2.2.3.	This is untrue - the law already provides for enforced medical treatment where lack of this treatment risks the lives of others (e.g. a person who becomes violent as a result of psychological illness can be 'sectioned' under the Mental Health Act).	pro	
mandatory vaccination violates the right to informed consent.	5_1.10.2.3.	Mandatory vaccination violates the right to informed consent.	con	The right to informed consent is not absolute and should be balanced against other rights, such as the right to protection from lethal diseases.	People who support violating individuals' right to informed consent are adopting the standard employed by the Nazis to experiment on humans during WWII.	The right to informed consent is one of the most fundamental tenets of medical ethics.
people who support violating individuals' right to informed consent are adopting the standard employed by the nazis to experiment on humans during wwii.	5_1.10.2.3.2.	People who support violating individuals' right to informed consent are adopting the standard employed by the Nazis to experiment on humans during WWII.	con	There's a significant ethical difference between experimenting on prisoners and society looking at evidence and deciding that, collectively, we need to work together to reduce death and disease.	Public safety is more important than the individual consent, especially in cases where the dissenting opinion has proven to be false and it is harmful to others.
there's a significant ethical difference between experimenting on prisoners and society looking at evidence and deciding that, collectively, we need to work together to reduce death and disease.	5_1.10.2.3.2.1.	There's a significant ethical difference between experimenting on prisoners and society looking at evidence and deciding that, collectively, we need to work together to reduce death and disease.	pro	
public safety is more important than the individual consent, especially in cases where the dissenting opinion has proven to be false and it is harmful to others.	5_1.10.2.3.2.2.	Public safety is more important than the individual consent, especially in cases where the dissenting opinion has proven to be false and it is harmful to others.	pro	
the right to informed consent is one of the most fundamental tenets of medical ethics.	5_1.10.2.3.3.	The right to informed consent is one of the most fundamental tenets of medical ethics.	con	Mandatory vaccination takes away an individual's right to choose with informed consent, and without informed consent it is medically unethical to force a medicine, medical procedure, or surgery upon the patient.
mandatory vaccination would primarily (or, depending on the specific law, only) affect young children, who already have all of their medical decisions made for them by adults.	5_1.10.2.4.	Mandatory vaccination would primarily (or, depending on the specific law, only) affect young children, who already have all of their medical decisions made for them by adults.	pro	
knowingly putting a child at risk of contracting a deadly disease is arguably a greater violation of bodily autonomy than vaccinating them.	5_1.10.2.5.	Knowingly putting a child at risk of contracting a deadly disease is arguably a greater violation of bodily autonomy than vaccinating them.	pro	
an individual has a right to life. their parents do not have the right to unreasonably risk this right.	5_1.10.2.6.	An individual has a right to life. Their parents do not have the right to unreasonably risk this right.	pro	
quarantine is morally justifiable, and vaccination is less intrusive than this.	5_1.10.2.7.	Quarantine is morally justifiable, and vaccination is less intrusive than this.	pro	
spreading preventable communicable diseases is a violation of the rights of other's personal bodily integrity.	5_1.10.2.8.	Spreading preventable communicable diseases is a violation of the rights of other's personal bodily integrity.	pro	
human rights are contingent on the protection of other people's safety. not vaccinating is unsafe for yourself and others.	5_1.10.5.	Human rights are contingent on the protection of other people's safety. Not vaccinating is unsafe for yourself and others.	pro	Human rights are human right, regardless of how safe or unsafe it is, the human has the right to decide what he wants to do with his own body. If you're afraid of someone carrying a disease you can simply vaccinate yourself to be immune to it.	An individual's right to decline a vaccine is more than outweighed by another individual's right to live free of infectious disease.	The risk profile of not vaccinating is so small that it does not warrant the suspension of one's human rights to mitigate such risk.
human rights are human right, regardless of how safe or unsafe it is, the human has the right to decide what he wants to do with his own body. if you're afraid of someone carrying a disease you can simply vaccinate yourself to be immune to it.	5_1.10.5.1.	Human rights are human right, regardless of how safe or unsafe it is, the human has the right to decide what he wants to do with his own body. If you're afraid of someone carrying a disease you can simply vaccinate yourself to be immune to it.	con	
an individual's right to decline a vaccine is more than outweighed by another individual's right to live free of infectious disease.	5_1.10.5.2.	An individual's right to decline a vaccine is more than outweighed by another individual's right to live free of infectious disease.	pro	
the risk profile of not vaccinating is so small that it does not warrant the suspension of one's human rights to mitigate such risk.	5_1.10.5.3.	The risk profile of not vaccinating is so small that it does not warrant the suspension of one's human rights to mitigate such risk.	con	
the right to refuse medical intervention can already be overridden in circumstances where this refusal creates risk for others (e.g. sectioning of high-risk mental health patients, or isolation of people with dangerous infectious diseases). the same precedent could easily be applied to vaccination.	5_1.10.6.	The right to refuse medical intervention can already be overridden in circumstances where this refusal creates risk for others (e.g. sectioning of high-risk mental health patients, or isolation of people with dangerous infectious diseases). The same precedent could easily be applied to vaccination.	pro	Just because there is a risk for something to happen doesn't mean you force someone do something against their will. On the same logic every fastfood using at least a ingredient that has a risk of any kind of health problems should be banned.
just because there is a risk for something to happen doesn't mean you force someone do something against their will. on the same logic every fastfood using at least a ingredient that has a risk of any kind of health problems should be banned.	5_1.10.6.1.	Just because there is a risk for something to happen doesn't mean you force someone do something against their will. On the same logic every fastfood using at least a ingredient that has a risk of any kind of health problems should be banned.	con	
one could use the same logic to claim murderers should not be incarcerated as that infringes their right to freedom. it is easy to raise a sentimental response, much more so than perform a concise exchange of arguments. that is fundamentally the root of this debate. how can statistical certainty compare to the sentiment a hurt child provokes? however the exact same logical fallacies characterise both arguments, as it is not a matter of opinion as much as a competition between fact and sentiment.	5_1.10.7.	One could use the same logic to claim murderers should not be incarcerated as that infringes their right to freedom. It is easy to raise a sentimental response, much more so than perform a concise exchange of arguments. That is fundamentally the root of this debate. How can statistical certainty compare to the sentiment a hurt child provokes? However the exact same logical fallacies characterise both arguments, as it is not a matter of opinion as much as a competition between fact and sentiment.	pro	This is not relevant here as it is based on a false assumption. Nobody should ever be incarcerated (for any possible reason) because that indeed infringes their right to freedom.
this is not relevant here as it is based on a false assumption. nobody should ever be incarcerated (for any possible reason) because that indeed infringes their right to freedom.	5_1.10.7.1.	This is not relevant here as it is based on a false assumption. Nobody should ever be incarcerated (for any possible reason) because that indeed infringes their right to freedom.	con	
vaccines should only be mandatory if they are also free, otherwise this places an unjust burden on low-income families which essentially punishes parents for being poor.	5_1.11.	Vaccines should only be mandatory if they are also free, otherwise this places an unjust burden on low-income families which essentially punishes parents for being poor.	con	It is possible to get free or low cost vaccinations.
it is possible to get free or low cost vaccinations.	5_1.11.1.	It is possible to get free or low cost vaccinations.	pro	
evidence suggests vaccines are an effective means of protecting people from disease.	5_1.12.	Evidence suggests vaccines are an effective means of protecting people from disease.	pro	Vaccines are recommended by the vast majority of paediatricians.	There are no randomized, placebo controlled studies of long term health outcomes of children who receive the full CDC childhood schedule and unvaccinated children.	The current vaccine schedule is very much evidence based.	It does not follow from the premise that vaccines are effective that therefore they ought to be mandatory.	Vaccines are reported to avoid 2-3 million deaths per year.	Vaccinations have helped eradicate a number of diseases.	A vaccine that shifts infection towards the asymptomatic range could increase the rate of spread of the infection, due to changes in risk aversion. Studying the Efficacy and Perception of Whooping Cough Vaccines
vaccines are recommended by the vast majority of paediatricians.	5_1.12.1.	Vaccines are recommended by the vast majority of paediatricians.	pro	13% of pediatricians don't follow the CDC vaccination schedule for their own children.
13% of pediatricians don't follow the cdc vaccination schedule for their own children.	5_1.12.1.1.	13% of pediatricians don't follow the CDC vaccination schedule for their own children.	con	It follows, therefore, that 87% do, which definitely constitutes "the vast majority".
it follows, therefore, that 87% do, which definitely constitutes "the vast majority".	5_1.12.1.1.1.	It follows, therefore, that 87% do, which definitely constitutes "the vast majority".	pro	
there are no randomized, placebo controlled studies of long term health outcomes of children who receive the full cdc childhood schedule and unvaccinated children.	5_1.12.2.	There are no randomized, placebo controlled studies of long term health outcomes of children who receive the full CDC childhood schedule and unvaccinated children.	con	It would be clinically meaningless to design & implement a case-control, prospective study of "all vaccines" vs "no-vaccines." Every new development is proposed to be implemented onto the backdrop of current reality. Each currently recommended vaccine has been studied individually against the then-current recommendations. (When HPV was being studied in the 1990s, both arms of the study would have had their routinely-recommended MMRs, for example).	Studies of long-term health outcomes are not justified in the face of proven short-term decreases in serious outcomes like death or paralysis	That study would be unethical. Without clinical equipoise we can't ethically randomize people into a placebo arm.	Billions of doses over decades with incredibly tight surveillance have shown that the effects are really good and the side effects are very minimal.	They have been researched to the level that institutional review boards and researchers are convinced. The professionals involved are the only people qualified to make that call and they've made it.	Mandatory vaccination makes our children subjects of a grand experiment with potentially disastrous outcomes.
it would be clinically meaningless to design & implement a case-control, prospective study of "all vaccines" vs "no-vaccines." every new development is proposed to be implemented onto the backdrop of current reality. each currently recommended vaccine has been studied individually against the then-current recommendations. (when hpv was being studied in the 1990s, both arms of the study would have had their routinely-recommended mmrs, for example).	5_1.12.2.1.	It would be clinically meaningless to design & implement a case-control, prospective study of "all vaccines" vs "no-vaccines." Every new development is proposed to be implemented onto the backdrop of current reality. Each currently recommended vaccine has been studied individually against the then-current recommendations. (When HPV was being studied in the 1990s, both arms of the study would have had their routinely-recommended MMRs, for example).	pro	
studies of long-term health outcomes are not justified in the face of proven short-term decreases in serious outcomes like death or paralysis	5_1.12.2.2.	Studies of long-term health outcomes are not justified in the face of proven short-term decreases in serious outcomes like death or paralysis	pro	
that study would be unethical. without clinical equipoise we can't ethically randomize people into a placebo arm.	5_1.12.2.3.	That study would be unethical. Without clinical equipoise we can't ethically randomize people into a placebo arm.	pro	It is not unethical to do proper safety studies to gain reasonable assurances that a medical intervention is safe. It is unethical to not do proper safety studies and use the entire population as guinea pigs in a massive experiment.	If there's any good evidence that one wing of a study is more beneficial than the other then it's unethical to randomize people into it.
it is not unethical to do proper safety studies to gain reasonable assurances that a medical intervention is safe. it is unethical to not do proper safety studies and use the entire population as guinea pigs in a massive experiment.	5_1.12.2.3.1.	It is not unethical to do proper safety studies to gain reasonable assurances that a medical intervention is safe. It is unethical to not do proper safety studies and use the entire population as guinea pigs in a massive experiment.	con	
if there's any good evidence that one wing of a study is more beneficial than the other then it's unethical to randomize people into it.	5_1.12.2.3.2.	If there's any good evidence that one wing of a study is more beneficial than the other then it's unethical to randomize people into it.	pro	This argument demonstrates the fallacy of begging the question. One cannot "know" that the benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks if the proper studies, necessary to be able to determine that with any reasonable certainty, haven't been done.
this argument demonstrates the fallacy of begging the question. one cannot "know" that the benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks if the proper studies, necessary to be able to determine that with any reasonable certainty, haven't been done.	5_1.12.2.3.2.1.	This argument demonstrates the fallacy of begging the question. One cannot "know" that the benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks if the proper studies, necessary to be able to determine that with any reasonable certainty, haven't been done.	con	
they have been researched to the level that institutional review boards and researchers are convinced. the professionals involved are the only people qualified to make that call and they've made it.	5_1.12.2.5.	They have been researched to the level that institutional review boards and researchers are convinced. The professionals involved are the only people qualified to make that call and they've made it.	pro	
mandatory vaccination makes our children subjects of a grand experiment with potentially disastrous outcomes.	5_1.12.2.6.	Mandatory vaccination makes our children subjects of a grand experiment with potentially disastrous outcomes.	con	
the current vaccine schedule is very much evidence based.	5_1.12.3.	The current vaccine schedule is very much evidence based.	pro	
it does not follow from the premise that vaccines are effective that therefore they ought to be mandatory.	5_1.12.4.	It does not follow from the premise that vaccines are effective that therefore they ought to be mandatory.	con	There are many other health interventions that, while effective, are not mandatory.	Mandatory vaccinations would impose on people's right to bodily integrity.	Mandates for seatbelts in vehicles, or for PPE in the workplace, have been hugely successful in reducing fatalities and injuries.
there are many other health interventions that, while effective, are not mandatory.	5_1.12.4.1.	There are many other health interventions that, while effective, are not mandatory.	con	
mandates for seatbelts in vehicles, or for ppe in the workplace, have been hugely successful in reducing fatalities and injuries.	5_1.12.4.3.	Mandates for seatbelts in vehicles, or for PPE in the workplace, have been hugely successful in reducing fatalities and injuries.	pro	But you can find many counter-examples as well. For example, antibiotics are highly effective, but no doctor will force you to take them if you have an infection.
but you can find many counter-examples as well. for example, antibiotics are highly effective, but no doctor will force you to take them if you have an infection.	5_1.12.4.3.1.	But you can find many counter-examples as well. For example, antibiotics are highly effective, but no doctor will force you to take them if you have an infection.	con	
vaccinations have helped eradicate a number of diseases.	5_1.12.6.	Vaccinations have helped eradicate a number of diseases.	pro	Vaccinations have already proven effective at completely eradicating diseases such as small pox.	The eradication of such diseases can help to preserve human life and is crucial for avoiding epidemics which kill thousands of people. These vaccinations are therefore benefit all.	Many diseases that were once endemic are now eradicated or extremely rare despite the fact no mass vaccination campaigns ever existed for them.	Millions of people have been vaccinated with the polio vaccine and the number of polio cases per year is nearly 0.
vaccinations have already proven effective at completely eradicating diseases such as small pox.	5_1.12.6.1.	Vaccinations have already proven effective at completely eradicating diseases such as small pox.	pro	There are no guarantees that smallpox would still be endemic in the US today even if no vaccines had been administered.
there are no guarantees that smallpox would still be endemic in the us today even if no vaccines had been administered.	5_1.12.6.1.1.	There are no guarantees that smallpox would still be endemic in the US today even if no vaccines had been administered.	con	Advances in health care, sanitation, nutrition, etc., can account for the decline in communicable diseases seen during the 20th century.
advances in health care, sanitation, nutrition, etc., can account for the decline in communicable diseases seen during the 20th century.	5_1.12.6.1.1.1.	Advances in health care, sanitation, nutrition, etc., can account for the decline in communicable diseases seen during the 20th century.	con	
the eradication of such diseases can help to preserve human life and is crucial for avoiding epidemics which kill thousands of people. these vaccinations are therefore benefit all.	5_1.12.6.2.	The eradication of such diseases can help to preserve human life and is crucial for avoiding epidemics which kill thousands of people. These vaccinations are therefore benefit all.	pro	
many diseases that were once endemic are now eradicated or extremely rare despite the fact no mass vaccination campaigns ever existed for them.	5_1.12.6.3.	Many diseases that were once endemic are now eradicated or extremely rare despite the fact no mass vaccination campaigns ever existed for them.	con	Bubonic plague is much less common due to improved sanitation and control of rats.	Leprosy has been drastically reduced wordwide due to aggressive surveillance and drug treatment.	The CDC is famous for successfully eradicating malaria in the southern United States.
bubonic plague is much less common due to improved sanitation and control of rats.	5_1.12.6.3.1.	Bubonic plague is much less common due to improved sanitation and control of rats.	con	
leprosy has been drastically reduced wordwide due to aggressive surveillance and drug treatment.	5_1.12.6.3.2.	Leprosy has been drastically reduced wordwide due to aggressive surveillance and drug treatment.	con	
the cdc is famous for successfully eradicating malaria in the southern united states.	5_1.12.6.3.3.	The CDC is famous for successfully eradicating malaria in the southern United States.	con	
millions of people have been vaccinated with the polio vaccine and the number of polio cases per year is nearly 0.	5_1.12.6.4.	Millions of people have been vaccinated with the polio vaccine and the number of polio cases per year is nearly 0.	pro	
a vaccine that shifts infection towards the asymptomatic range could increase the rate of spread of the infection, due to changes in risk aversion. studying the efficacy and perception of whooping cough vaccines	5_1.12.7.	A vaccine that shifts infection towards the asymptomatic range could increase the rate of spread of the infection, due to changes in risk aversion. Studying the Efficacy and Perception of Whooping Cough Vaccines	con	
